 id="file23242608" filename="02599b.htm" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.newadvent.org/cathen/02599b.htm">
 In its widest acceptation this word has a variety of meanings in the sacred writings: 
 It has taken in a sense that is synonymous with praise; thus the Psalmist, "I will bless the Lord at all times, His praise shall be always in my mouth" (Ps. xxxiii, 1). 
 It is used to express a wish or desire that all good fortune, especially of a spiritual or supernatural kind, may go with the person or thing, as when David says: "Blessed art thou, and it shall be well with thee" (Ps. cxxvii, 2). 
 It signifies the sanctification or dedication of a, person or thing to some sacred purpose; "Christ took bread and blessed, and broke" (Matthew 26:26). 
 Finally it is employed to designate a gift so Naaman addresses Eliseus: "I beseech thee therefore take a blessing of thy servant" (2 Kings 6:15). 
 With these various significations it is not the present purpose to deal. Coming, then, to its strictly liturgical and restricted sense, blessing may be described as a rite, consisting of a ceremony and prayers performed in the name and with the authority of the Church by a duly qualified minister, by which persons or things are sanctified as dedicated to Divine service, or by which certain marks of Divine favour are invoked upon them. The following aspects of the subject will be discussed: 
 I. Antiquity; II. Minister; III. Objects; IV. Efficacy; and V. Rite employed in administering. 
 Antiquity 
 The custom of giving blessings goes back to the very earliest times. In the morning of Creation, on the completion of each day's work, God blessed the living creatures that came from His hands, bidding them increase and multiply and fill the earth (Gen. i-ii). When Noah emerged from the Ark, he received God's benediction (Genesis 9:1), and this heritage he transmitted through his sons, Sem and Japheth, to posterity. The pages of the Old Testament testify abundantly to the great extent to which the practice of blessing prevailed in the patriarchal ages. The head of each tribe and family seemed to be privileged to bestow it with a special unction and fruitfulness, and the priests at the express direction of God were wont to administer it to the people. "Thus shall you bless the children of Israel. . . and the Lord will turn His countenance and give them peace" (Numbers 6:23-26). That great value was attributed to blessings is seen from the strategy adopted by Rebecca to secure Jacob's blessing for her favourite son. In general estimation it was regarded as a mark of Divine complacency and as a sure way to secure God's benevolence, peace, and protection. The New Dispensation saw the adoption of this rite by Our Divine Lord and His Apostles, and so, elevated, ennobled, and consecrated by such high and holy usage, it came at a very early stage in the Church's history to assume definite and concrete shape as the chief among her sacramentals. 
 Minister 
 Since, then, blessings, in the sense in which they are being considered, are entirely of ecclesiastical institution, the Church has the power to determine who shall have the right and duty to confer them. This she has done by entrusting their administration to those who are in sacerdotal orders. The solitary case in which one inferior to a priest is empowered to bless, is where the deacon blesses the paschal candle in the ceremonies of Holy Saturday. This exception is more apparent than real. For in the instance referred to the deacon acts by way of a deputy and, moreover, employs the grains of incense already blessed by the celebrant. Priests, then, are the ordinary ministers of blessings, and this is only in the fitness of things since they are ordained, as the words of the Pontifical run: "ut quæcumque benedixerint benedicantur, et quacumque consecraverint consecrentur" (That whatever they bless may be blessed, and whatever they consecrate shall be consecrated). When, therefore, laymen and women are represented as blessing others it is to be understood that this is an act of will on their part, a wish or desire for another's spiritual or temporal prosperity, an appeal to God which has nothing to recommend it but the merits of personal sanctity. The ordinary greetings and salutations that take places between Christians and Catholics, leavened by mutual wishes for a share of heavenly grace, must not be confounded with liturgical blessings. St. Gregory first definitely taught that the angels are divided into hierarchies or orders, each having its own role to play in the economy of creation. Similarly the Church recognizes different orders or grades among her ministers, assigning to some higher functions than to others. The working out of this idea is seen in the case of conferring blessings. For while it is true that a priest can ordinarily give them, some blessings are reserved to the Supreme Pontiff, some to bishops, and some to parish priests and religious. The first class is not large. The pope reserves to himself the right to bless the pallium for archbishops, Agnus-Deis, the Golden Rose, the Royal Sword, and also to give that benediction of persons to which an indulgence of some days is attached. He may, and in the case of the last mentioned often does, depute others to give these. To bishops belongs the privilege of blessing abbots at their installation, priests at their ordination, and virgins at their consecration; of blessing churches, cemeteries, oratories, and all articles for use in connection with the altar, such as chalices, vestments, and clothes, military standards, soldiers, arms, and swords; and of imparting all blessings for which Holy Oils are required. Some of these may, on delegation, be performed by inferiors. Of the blessings which priests are generally empowered to grant, some are restricted to those who have external jurisdiction, like rectors or parish priests, and others are the exclusive prerogative of persons belonging to a religious order. There is a rule, too, by which an inferior cannot bless a superior or even exercise the ordinary powers in his presence. The priest, for instance, who says Mass at which a bishop presides is not to give the final blessing without permission from the prelate. For this curious custom authors cite a text from the Epistle to the Hebrews: "And without all contradiction that which is less is blessed by that which is greater" (vii, 7). It would seem an overstraining of the passage to say that it affords an argument for maintaining that an inferior minister cannot bless one who is his superior in rank or dignity, for the text either merely enunciates an incident of common usage, or means that the inferior by the fact that he blesses is the greater, since he acts as the representative of God. 
 Objects 
 The range of objects that come under the influence of the Church's blessing is as comprehensive as the spiritual and temporal interests of her children. All the lower creatures have been made to serve man and minister to his needs. As nothing, then, should be left undone to enhance their utility towards this end, they are placed in a way under the direct providence of "Every creature of God is good. . .", as St. Paul says "for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer" (1 Timothy 4:4-5). There is also the reflection that the effects of the Fall extended to the inanimate objects of creation, marring in a manner the original aim of their existence and making them, in the hands of evil spirits, ready instruments for the perpetration of iniquity. In the Epistle to the Romans St. Paul describes inanimate nature, blighted by the primal curse, groaning in travail and anxiously awaiting its deliverance from bondage. "The expectation of the creature waiteth for the revelation of the Sons of God. For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him that made it subject, in hope" (viii, 19-20). From this it will be easily seen how very reasonable is the anxiety of the Church that the things which are used in daily life and particularly in the service of religion, should be rescued from contaminating influences and endowed with a potency for good. The principal liturgical blessings recognized and sanctioned by Church are contained in the Roman Ritual and the Pontifical. The Missal, besides the blessing given at the end of Mass, contains only those blessings associated with the great functions incidental to certain days of the year, such as the blessing of palms and ashes. In the Pontifical are found the blessings that are performed de jure by bishops, such as the solemn blessing of persons already referred to, the forms for blessing kings, emperors, and princes at their coronation, and those before mentioned as of episcopal prerogative. 
 The great treasury of ecclesiastical blessings is the Roman Ritual. 
 Formulæ for blessing persons 
 First comes a blessing for pilgrims to the Holy Land, on their departure and return containing beautiful prayers and apt allusions to the Magi journeying through the Arabian desert under the guidance of the Star, to Abraham leaving his own country and setting his face towards the distant land of Canaan, to the Angel companion of the younger Tobias, and, finally, an appeal to God to prove to the wayfarers a solace on their journey, a shade from summer heats, a shelter in storm, and a haven of safety. Next follow blessings of persons with Holy Water before Mass, for an adult who is sick, for a number of sick people, one for a woman on the approach of confinement and another after childbirth, blessings for infants, for children come to the use of reason and for those arrived at years of discretion, for children on their presentation in Church, that they may lead good Christian lives, for boys and girls on the Feast of the Holy Infancy that they may grow up to imitate the virtues of the Saviour and reach salvation under His guidance. 
 (b) The following articles of food have benedictions assigned to them: paschal lamb, eggs, oil, wine, lard, cheese, butter, dripping, salt, and water which is used as antidote to rabies. There is also a form for everything that may be eaten. The fruits of the earth, such as grapes, corn, and the garnered harvest, seeds that are put into the earth, wine and the vintage, herbs and grasses may all in a fitting and appropriate language be "sanctified by the word of God and prayer". 
 (c) The lower animals which minister to the reasonable requirements of the human family may have blessings invoked upon them in order that the measure of their usefulness may be increased. Thus, birds of the air, beasts of the field, bees that afford such examples of industry to man, horses and oxen broken to the yoke, and other beasts of burden are included in the formularies of the Ritual. The Creator is invoked to grant to the brute strength and health to bear his burthen and, if attacked by sickness or plague, to obtain deliverance. 
 (d) The Ritual has blessings for houses and schools and for the laying of their foundation stones; for stables for the lower animals and every other building of any description for which no special formula is at hand. There is also a special blessing for the bridal chamber. 
 (e) Lastly inanimate things that subserve the equitable needs and convenience of society may receive from the Church the stamp of her benediction before they are sent on their way to do their appointed tasks. Such, for instance, are new ships, new railways with trains and carriages, new bridges, fountains, wells, cornmills, limekilns, smelting-furnaces, telegraphs, steam engines, machines for producing electricity. The many serious accidents that occur explain the concern of the Church for those whose lives are exposed to danger from these various sources. 
 Efficacy 
 The inquiry will be confined to the Blessings approved of by the Church. As has been said, the value of a blessing given by a private person in his own name will be commensurate with his acceptableness before God by reason of his individual merits and sanctity. A blessing, on the other hand, imparted with the sanction of the Church has all the weight of authority that reaches to the voice of her who is the well-beloved spouse of Christ, pleading on behalf of her children. The whole efficacy, therefore, of these benedictions, in so far as they are liturgical and ecclesiastical, is derived from the prayers and invocations of the Church made in her name by her ministers. 
 Blessings may be divided into two classes, viz: invocative and constitutive. The former are those in which the Divine benignity is invoked on persons or things, to bring down upon them some temporal or spiritual good without changing their former condition. Of this kind are the blessings given to children, and to articles of food. The latter class are so called because they permanently depute persons or things to Divine service by imparting to them some sacred character, by which they assume a new and distinct spiritual relationship. Such are the blessings given churches and chalices by their consecration. In this case a certain abiding quality of sacredness is conferred in virtue of which the persons or things blessed become inviolably sacred so that they cannot be divested of their religious character or be turned to profane uses. Again, theologians distinguish blessings of an intermediate sort, by which things are rendered special instruments of salvation without at the same time becoming irrevocably sacred, such as blessed salt, candles, etc. Blessings are not sacraments; they are not of Divine institution; they do not confer sanctifying grace; and they do not produce their effects in virtue of the rite itself, or ex opere operato. They are sacramentals and, as such, they produce the following specific effects: 
 Excitation of pious emotions and affections of the heart and, by means of these, remission of venial sin and of the temporal punishment due to it; 
 All these effects are not necessarily inherent in any one blessing; some are caused by one formula, and others by another, according to the intentions of the Church. Neither are these effects to be regarded as infallibly produced, except in so far as impetration of the Church has this attribute. The religious veneration, therefore, in which the faithful regard blessings has no faint of superstition, since it depends altogether on the Church's suffrages offered to God that the persons using the things she blesses may derive from them certain supernatural advantages. Instances are alleged in the lives of the saints where miracles have been wrought by the blessings of holy men and women. There is no reason to limit the miraculous interference of God to the early ages of the Church's history, and the Church never accepts these wonderful occurrences unless the evidence in support of their authenticity is absolutely unimpeachable. 
 Rite employed 
 Before a minister proceeds to impart any blessing he should first satisfy himself that it is one which he is duly qualified to give, either by his ordinary or delegated powers. He should next use the prescribed rite. As a rule, for the simple blessings of the Ritual, a soutane, surplice, and stole of the requisite colour will be sufficient. A clerk should be at hand to carry the Holy Water or incense if required, or to prepare a lighted candle. The blessings are ordinarily given in a church; but, if necessary, they can be lawfully administered elsewhere according to to the exigencies of place or other circumstances or privileges, and without any sacred vestment. 
 About this page 
 APA citation. Morrisroe, P. (1907). Blessing. In The Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/02599b.htm 
 MLA citation. Morrisroe, Patrick. "Blessing." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 2. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. <http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/02599b.htm>. 
 Ecclesiastical approbation. Nihil Obstat. 1907. Remy Lafort, S.T.D., Censor. Imprimatur. +John M. Farley, Archbishop of New York. 
 Contact information. The editor of New Advent is Kevin Knight. My email address is webmaster at newadvent.org. Regrettably, I can't reply to every letter, but I greatly appreciate your feedback — especially notifications about typographical errors and inappropriate ads. 

 id="file23242592" filename="12-3.htm" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.biblehub.com/genesis/12-3.htm">
 New International Version I will bless those who bless you, and whoever curses you I will curse; and all peoples on earth will be blessed through you.  
 New Living Translation I will bless those who bless you and curse those who treat you with contempt. All the families on earth will be blessed through you.  
 English Standard Version I will bless those who bless you, and him who dishonors you I will curse, and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed.  
 Berean Study Bible I will bless those who bless you and curse those who curse you; and all the families of the earth will be blessed through you.  
 King James Bible And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. 
 New King James Version I will bless those who bless you, And I will curse him who curses you; And in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed.  
 New American Standard Bible And I will bless those who bless you, And the one who curses you I will curse. And in you all the families of the earth will be blessed.  
 NASB 1995 And I will bless those who bless you, And the one who curses you I will curse. And in you all the families of the earth will be blessed.  
 NASB 1977 And I will bless those who bless you, And the one who curses you I will curse. And in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed.  
 Amplified Bible And I will bless (do good for, benefit) those who bless you, And I will curse [that is, subject to My wrath and judgment] the one who curses (despises, dishonors, has contempt for) you. And in you all the families (nations) of the earth will be blessed.  
 Christian Standard Bible I will bless those who bless you, I will curse anyone who treats you with contempt, and all the peoples on earth will be blessed through you. 
 Holman Christian Standard Bible I will bless those who bless you, I will curse those who treat you with contempt, and all the peoples on earth will be blessed through you. 
 American Standard Version and I will bless them that bless thee, and him that curseth thee will I curse: and in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed. 
 Aramaic Bible in Plain English And I shall bless those blessing you, and those cursing you I shall curse, and in you and in your seed all the generations of the Earth shall be blessed.  
 Brenton Septuagint Translation And I will bless those that bless thee, and curse those that curse thee, and in thee shall all the tribes of the earth be blessed. 
 Contemporary English Version I will bless those who bless you, but I will put a curse on anyone who puts a curse on you. Everyone on earth will be blessed because of you. 
 Douay-Rheims Bible I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, and IN THEE shall all the kindred of the earth be blessed: 
 English Revised Version and I will bless them that bless thee, and him that curseth thee will I curse: and in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed. 
 Good News Translation I will bless those who bless you, But I will curse those who curse you. And through you I will bless all the nations." 
 GOD'S WORD® Translation I will bless those who bless you, and whoever curses you, I will curse. Through you every family on earth will be blessed." 
 International Standard Version I'll bless those who bless you, but I'll curse the one who curses you, and through you all the people of the earth will be blessed." 
 JPS Tanakh 1917 And I will bless them that bless thee, and him that curseth thee will I curse; and in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed.' 
 Literal Standard Version And I bless those blessing you, and I curse him who is cursing you, and all families of the ground have been blessed in you.  
 NET Bible I will bless those who bless you, but the one who treats you lightly I must curse, and all the families of the earth will bless one another by your name." 
 New Heart English Bible And I will bless those who bless you, and I will curse those who treat you with contempt, and through you all the families of the earth will be blessed." 
 World English Bible I will bless those who bless you, and I will curse him who curses you. All of the families of the earth will be blessed in you." 
 Young's Literal Translation And I bless those blessing thee, and him who is disesteeming thee I curse, and blessed in thee have been all families of the ground.' 
 Luke 24:27 And beginning with Moses and all the Prophets, He explained to them what was written in all the Scriptures about Himself. 
 Acts 3:25 And you are sons of the prophets and of the covenant God made with your fathers when He said to Abraham, 'Through your offspring all the families of the earth will be blessed.' 
 Galatians 3:8 The Scripture foresaw that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, and foretold the gospel to Abraham: "All nations will be blessed through you." 
 Genesis 18:18 Abraham will surely become a great and powerful nation, and through him all the nations of the earth will be blessed. 
 Genesis 18:19 For I have chosen him, so that he will command his children and his household after him to keep the way of the LORD by doing what is right and just, in order that the LORD may bring upon Abraham what He has promised." 
 Genesis 22:18 And through your offspring all nations of the earth will be blessed, because you have obeyed My voice." 
 Genesis 24:35 "The LORD has greatly blessed my master, and he has become rich. He has given him sheep and cattle, silver and gold, menservants and maidservants, camels and donkeys. 
 Genesis 27:29 Let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth thee. 
 Exodus 23:22 But if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries. 
 Numbers 24:9 He couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a great lion: who shall stir him up? Blessed is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that curseth thee. 
 in thee. 
 Genesis 18:18 Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him? 
 Genesis 22:18 And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice. 
 Genesis 26:4 And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; 
 I will bless וַאֲבָֽרֲכָה֙ (wa·’ă·ḇā·ră·ḵāh) Conjunctive waw | Verb - Piel - Conjunctive imperfect Cohortative - first person common singular Strong's 1288: To kneel, to bless God, man, to curse 
 those who bless you מְבָ֣רְכֶ֔יךָ (mə·ḇā·rə·ḵe·ḵā) Verb - Piel - Participle - masculine plural construct | second person masculine singular Strong's 1288: To kneel, to bless God, man, to curse 
 and curse אָאֹ֑ר (’ā·’ōr) Verb - Qal - Imperfect - first person common singular Strong's 779: To execrate 
 those who curse you; וּמְקַלֶּלְךָ֖ (ū·mə·qal·lel·ḵā) Conjunctive waw | Verb - Piel - Participle - masculine singular construct | second person masculine singular Strong's 7043: To be slight, swift or trifling 
 and all כֹּ֖ל (kōl) Noun - masculine singular construct Strong's 3605: The whole, all, any, every 
 the families מִשְׁפְּחֹ֥ת (miš·pə·ḥōṯ) Noun - feminine plural construct Strong's 4940: A family, circle of relatives, a class, a species, sort, a tribe, people 
 of the earth הָאֲדָמָֽה׃ (hā·’ă·ḏā·māh) Article | Noun - feminine singular Strong's 127: Ground, land 
 will be blessed וְנִבְרְכ֣וּ (wə·niḇ·rə·ḵū) Conjunctive waw | Verb - Nifal - Conjunctive perfect - third person common plural Strong's 1288: To kneel, to bless God, man, to curse 
 through you.  בְךָ֔ (ḇə·ḵā) Preposition | second person masculine singular Strong's Hebrew 

 id="file23242549" filename="12-Ashes-A5.pdf" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.liturgyoffice.org.uk/Resources/OCF/12-Ashes-A5.pdf">
Blessing
329 The minister then says the following:

Rite for the Burial of Ashes
an excerpt from the Order of Christian Funerals

Eternal rest grant unto him/her, O Lord.
R. And let perpetual light shine upon him/her.
May he/she rest in peace.
R. Amen.
May his/her soul and the souls of all the faithful departed, through the
mercy of God, rest in peace.
R. Amen.
A A minister who is a priest or deacon says:

May the peace of God,
which is beyond all understanding,
keep your hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God
and of his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ.
R. Amen.

outline of the rite
Invitation
Scripture Verse
Prayer of Committal
The Lord’s Prayer
Blessing

May almighty God bless you,
the Father, and the Son, c and the Holy Spirit.
R. Amen.
B A lay minister invokes God’s blessing and signs himself or herself with the sign of the
cross, saying:

May the love of God and the peace of the Lord Jesus Christ
bless and console us
and gently wipe every tear from our eyes:
in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
R. Amen.
The minister then concludes:

Go in the peace of Christ.
R. Thanks be to God.
A sign or gesture of leave-taking may be made, for instance, sprinkling the place of
burial or entombment with holy water.

RITE FOR THE BURIAL OF ASHES

Excerpt from the English Translation of Order of Christian Funerals ©1989, 1985, International
Committee on English in the Liturgy, Inc. Editorial Arrangement ©1990, 2005 Liturgy Office
of Bishops’ Conference of England and Wales. Scripture Readings are taken from The Jerusalem
© 1966 by Darton, Longman & Todd, Ltd.
E N G L A N D Bible
Order of Christian Funerals is published by Burns and Oates (0 86012 380 4)
& W A L E S www.liturgyoffice.org.uk/Resources

Liturgy
Office

RITE FOR THE BURIAL OF ASHES

12 rite for the burial of ashes
324 This rite may be used when the family and friends of the deceased ask for the
ashes to be buried shortly after the funeral.

Invitation
325 The minister begins:

My friends, we have come together to bury/entomb the ashes of our
brother/sister N. In doing this we recall that our bodies bear the imprint
of the first creation when they were fashioned from dust; but in faith we
remember, too, that by the new creation we also bear the image of Jesus who
was raised to glory.
In confident hope that one day God will raise us and transform our mortal
bodies:

Scripture Verse
326 One of the following or another brief Scripture verse is read. The minister first
says:

Let us listen to the words of scripture:
A

John 14:1-3

Jesus says:
‘Do not let your hearts be troubled.
Trust in God still and trust in me.
There are many rooms in my Father’s house;
if there were not, I should have told you.
I am going now to prepare a place for you,
and after I have gone and prepared you a place,
I shall return to take you with me,
so that where I am you may be too.’
B

Prayer of Committal
327 The minister then says the following prayer, during or after which the ashes are
buried or entombed.

Let us pray.
Faithful God,
Lord of all creation,
you desire that nothing redeemed by your Son
will ever be lost,
and that the just will be raised up on the last day.
Comfort us today with the word of your promise
as we return the ashes of our brother/sister to the earth.
Grant N. a place of rest and peace
where the world of dust and ashes has no dominion.
Confirm us in our hope that he/she will be created anew
on the day when you will raise him/her up in glory
to live with you and all the saints
for ever and ever.
R. Amen.
A brief period of silent prayer or informal intercessions may follow.

The Lord’s Prayer
328 Using the following or similar words, the minister invites those present to pray
the Lord’s Prayer.

Now let us pray as Christ the Lord has taught us:
All say:

Our Father…

Colossians 3:3-4

You have died, and now the life you have is hidden with Christ in God. But
when Christ is revealed — and he is your life — you too will be revealed in
all your glory with him.
C

Romans 6:8-9

We believe that having died with Christ we shall return to life with him:
Christ, as we know, having been raised from the dead will never die again.
Death has no power over him any more.
RITE FOR THE BURIAL OF ASHES

RITE FOR THE BURIAL OF ASHES

 id="file23242643" filename="14077" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://international.la-croix.com/news/religion/vatican-ii-sacramental-theology-and-same-sex-blessings/14077">
 Vatican II, sacramental theology and same-sex blessings 
 The Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith's (CDF) responsum concerning the blessing of same sex unions brings into focus the important theological question of how homosexuality is to be understood within the order of creation and within Scripture. 
 On the basis of its understanding, the CDF has concluded that the Church cannot officially bless people in same gender unions that approximate marriage. 
 The Magisterium teaches that homosexuality is a "disordered nature" and classifies homosexual lovemaking as "intrinsically disordered" (Catechism of the Catholic Church, 2357). 
 In the Catechism, ordered nature reflects God's creation of male and female human beings who are made for each other. This principle could be described as exclusively heterosexual. 
 The magisterial understanding of sexuality is derived from this principle. Sexuality "concerns affectivity, the capacity to love and to procreate", creating the "aptitude for forming bonds of communion with others" (CCC, 2332) and is "ordered to the conjugal love of a man and a woman" (CCC, 2360). 
 The Magisterium's understanding of creation and sexuality is heavily criticized for being binary and considered outdated.Many would suggest that sexuality differentiates itself between sexual attraction, physical attraction, and emotional attraction and is not essentially related to procreation or the capacity to love. 
 A limited, binary view of creation and sexuality 
 The strongest critics of the responsum accuse the CDF of ignoring the last 100-plus years of research into human sexuality. 
 They argue that maintaining the theology of "disordered nature" on the assumption that the "psychological genesis [of homosexuality] remains largely unexplained" (CCC, 2357) is incorrect. 
 Critics argue that a necessary distinction between sexual orientations and sexualities is required, and that one should see sexuality as given,diverse and personal. 
 The desire to bless same-sex unions challenges the Magisterium's binary view of creation and sexuality. In doing so it reveals the essential question, which is not the sacramental character of the sacrament of matrimony, nor is it the perceived threat to matrimony. 
 The essential question is on what basis can one say that a person's nature is theologically disordered and their love making "grave depravity" and "intrinsically disordered" and still admit them into incorporation with Christ? 
 This is to question the use of the primary sources on which the magisterial teaching is built, the interpretation of scripture and the presumption that the "natural law" is a fully known and not itself subject to growth in understanding. 
 This starting point is critical for how we understand a blessing given to a couple sharing the same-gender, because it brings us back to the larger question: what is the nature and place of homosexuality and homosexual lovemaking in the order of creation and how does homosexuality and lovemaking participate in the "blessing of God"? 
 It alerts us to consider how sexuality is understood. If sexuality a blessing of God, then how it is defined, and by whom it is defined, is critical. 
 Blessings and Benedictions 
 The debate concerning the blessing is, by comparison, a sidebar. It is important only because the theological pathway from blessing to ecclesial act and sacramental—that resembles a sacrament—is full of potholes. 
 To make this clearer I will distinguish between a blessing and a benediction. 
 A blessing (noun) is a request to God to care for someone or something, it is also an act to make someone, or oneself, happy. 
 A benediction (noun) combines the Latin words bene meaning well and dicereto say. Benedicere: to wish well, is to say something good to another as a prayer, invocation, or dedication. 
 Blessing, according to the Catechism (1078ff), is in the nature of God and the whole of God's work is blessing. The whole of the created order needs salvation because it is fallen, yet everything and everyone who exists is also a blessing of God. 
 The Catechism states that the dignity of each individual person is rooted in his or her creation in the image and likeness of God (1700, 1702). 
 Blessing, as we commonly use it, is a prayer for God's favor or the dedication of an individual or object. 
 Parents bless their heterosexual and homosexual children all the time, long before any heterosexual or homosexual tendencies become manifest, and priests bless water, oil, and wedding rings. 
 What distinguishes one from another 
 However, there has to be more to a blessing to turn it from natural water into holy water. That "more" is the power of the ordained who makes the benediction; this is the basis of resemblance. 
 The additional "power" of the priest's benediction is seen where parishioners ask Father to bless their candles, dogs and cars, because his benediction is recognized as qualitatively different from their own. 
 Three things distinguish a blessing from a benediction. 
 First, there is the nature of reciprocity—who has the capacity to give and receive a blessing. 
 Second, the priest acts with the power of ordination in the name of the Church. 
 And third, there is the intention of the blessing and its resemblance to a sacrament. 
 Some suggest parents blessing their homosexual child on their child's wedding day is possible. While lay people may preside at some blessings, "the more a blessing concerns ecclesial and sacramental life, the more is its administration reserved to the ordained ministry (bishops, priests or deacons)" (CCC, 1669). 
 A benediction is a sacramental when it is received by a person who has the capacity to receive it—reciprocity—or when it is given to an object that will be used in sacred rites, such as a baptismal font. 
 When an ordained man gives a benediction, the benediction is implicitly reliant on the power of priesthood. 
 The responsum acknowledges that a benediction for an individual with homosexual inclinations remains licit as in religious profession, which affirms a woman or man in their chosen lifestyle. 
 However, a benediction is not permitted for two people (hetero- or homosexual) entering a "marriage-like state" because the state resembles the sacrament of matrimony and the benediction would resemblethe nuptial blessing. 
 Nature, sexuality and acts of love-making 
 According to the responsum's explanatory note, a benediction cannot be given to people whose relationship is not "objectively and positively ordered to receive and express grace according to the designs of God inscribed in creation and fully revealed by Christ the Lord". 
 To do so is to "bless sin". 
 At this level there is no distinction between couples on the basis of their sexual preference; neither can be given a benediction. 
 The issue for the same-sex couple is not their singularity as gay people, but the nature of their relationship, and within it, their lovemaking. Because their loving making is considered "intrinsically disordered" their relationship is seriously at fault. 
 At this point we return, again, to consider the theological reciprocity between nature, sexuality and acts of love-making. 
 The CDF concludes that, when a sacramental resembles a sacrament, a benediction cannot be given by the Church's minister because the blessing moves from being "just" a blessing to an "ecclesial liturgical action", or an act of the Church that invokes the priesthood of Christ. But God—in Christ—cannot bless sin. 
 Sacramentals are "sacred signs which bear a resemblanceto the sacraments [because] they signify effects, particularly of a spiritual nature, which are obtained through the intercession of the Church" for people who are "disposed to receive the chief effectsof the sacraments" (Sacrosanctum concilium, 60). 
 This definition draws together the connections between the recipient's disposition, the Church's prayer and the Church's minister. Together, these form a single unit that bring a sacramental into the orbit of a sacrament. 
 "Every baptized person is called to be a blessing and bless" 
 Critically, the Catechism (no. 1670) states: "Sacramentals do not confer the grace of the Holy Spirit in the way that the sacraments do" but through them believers are prepared though the Church's prayer "to received grace" and disposed "to cooperate with" grace. 
 It also states that sacramentals "derive from the baptismal priesthood" and "every baptized person is called to be a blessing and bless". 
 There are three points to note: (1) that a benediction is not a sacrament; (2) benedictions dispose; and (3) benedictions are related to baptism. 
 What is not made explicit in the responsum is the role of baptism in the reception of a benediction. 
 Some theologians argue that where two baptized individuals enter a same-sex union they already possess the theological capacity to receive a benediction just as baptized heterosexual couples receive the nuptial blessing. 
 Some suggest that because the Church's minister is a witness to the matrimony, and not the minister of it, in a similar way he has the capacity to impart a benediction in the name of the Church on a same-sex couple, especially if the couple are not intending a sacramental union. 
 Christian sacraments are sacred signs instituted by Christ to give grace and to save, and the sacrament of baptism is a celebration of God's sanctifying presence, transforming people and human experience. 
 Baptism is not reliant on, or referent to, a person's sexuality—however this is understood. Every baptized person enjoys the purification from sin, new birth in the Holy Spirit and incorporation into the Body of Christ. 
 All baptized persons receive a sacramental character that consecrates them for Christian worship, enabling them to participate in the sacred liturgy, to serve God and "to exercise their baptismal priesthood by witness of holy lives and practical charity (Lumen gentium, 10). 
 Proponents of benedictions for same-gender couples argue that baptism is the legitimate basis for the blessing of baptized same-gender partners. 
 They point out that the nature, purpose, intention and use of any benediction must correspond to the nature and effects of baptism. 
 A benediction is not only possible; it is required 
 They argue that because a person with homosexual tendencies, created in God's image and likeness, can be baptized—receiving the effects and grace of the sacrament and incorporation into the Body of Christ—that person possesses the theological capacity to receive the Church's benediction in virtue of their baptism, and not in virtue of the power of an ordained minister. 
 Where this argument is accepted, a benediction for two baptized people of the same-sex who live lives of faith -- when they are choosing and intending a life-long relationship that is not intended to be sacramental matrimony -- is not only possible; it is required. 
 At this point the argument for benedictions of same-sex union moves in a pastoral direction, suggesting that if the Church were to bless same-sex unions then it would remove the pain and suffering from the lives of some of its own members. 
 It is argued that the Church, by openly acknowledging and blessing such unions, would be seen to affirm the baptismal call of its members to live—in public—stable relationships of mutual and lasting fidelity. 
 Those who disagree see here the first step towards extending the sacrament of matrimony to same-sex couples. This concern cannot be avoided. 
 The sacramental character of matrimony and the resemblance of a civil union to it is an inaccurate use of resemblance. 
 The resemblance of a sacramental benediction to a sacrament seems to imply a resemblance to either the character of the sacrament or to its Eucharistic Prayer, however this is not outlined in the CDF responsum. But it is, nonetheless, critical to the debate. 
 Relying on the theological character of matrimony as the basis for denying benedictions to same-gender couples is risky, given this sacrament's history and unique sacramental character. 
 In matrimony the couple are both the ministers and the recipients of the sacrament—based on their baptism—and the Church's minister is the witnesses. 
 Similarly, the concern with "a certain imitation or analogue of the nuptial blessing" is also problematic, given that blessing's history and liturgical purpose. 
 The nuptial blessing's context is the Mass, coming after the Our Father and before the couple receives communion together. 
 The structure of the blessing is clearly a benediction and not a Eucharist Prayer—it does not confer the sacrament—because "it is ordinarily understood that the spouses, as ministers of Christ's grace, mutually confer upon each other the sacrament of Matrimony by expressing their consent before the Church" (CCC, 1623). 
 The Church's minister "assists" at the marriage and receives the spousal consent and blesses in the name of the Church, thus making it (matrimony) an ecclesial act. 
 On the basis of this understanding, many conclude that the denial of a benediction for a baptized couple who share the same gender, based on the benediction's resemblance to the nuptial benediction in the liturgy of matrimony, is unwarranted. 
 Lastly, the responsum states that "the Church does not have, and cannot have, the power to bless unions of persons of the same sex in the sense intended". 
 But Sacrosanctum concilium(no.79) — which is a higher teaching authority — suggests this might not be the whole story. 
 J.P. Grayland has been a priest of the Diocese of Palmerston North (New Zealand) for nearly thirty years. His latest book is titled: Catholics. Prayer, Belief and Diversity in a Secular Context (Te Hepara Pai, 2020). 
 Newsletter 
 Get the latest from La Croix International. Sign up to receive our daily newsletter. 
 SUPPORT LA CROIX INTERNATIONAL’S COMMUNITY OF READERS 
 Support La Croix International's unique blend of international Catholic journalism by making it available to people in Asia and Africa who can't afford a subscription and often don't have credit cards to pay for it either. 

 id="file23242814" filename="15407" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://international.la-croix.com/news/religion/memory-at-christmas-an-american-carol-and-biblical-images/15407">
 Memory at Christmas: an American carol and biblical images 
 How a popular tune like "We Three Kings" express how Christians have long interpreted the birth of the Messiah 
 Our identity as God's people is formed by our common memory. This joins us to one another and links us to the life, death and resurrection of Jesus. 
 Our memory feeds our imagination so that we can see the world as a redeemed creation, animated by the Spirit. The elements of this memory come in many shapes and forms such as prayers, familiar liturgies and stories from the Scriptures. 
 But one form -- hymns -- has a special place because of the way that their link between words and music etches deep images on our memories. We have just to hear a few notes and we can recall the words and the phrases lying dormant within us. 
 John and Charles Wesley understood this aspect of our memories when they made their hymns the bearers of their spirituality. So, too, have modern advertisers when they link their brand's logo with a strapline and a particular jingle. 
 These tunes are infectious. Just a few notes and you cannot get it out of your head for hours. Hence, they are called "earworms". 
 Holy Earworms 
 The magic of good Christmas carols is that they are popular and easy to sing. They not only convey a variety of theologies of the incarnation but can tell us a great deal about how Christians in the past remembered the coming of the Christ. 
 We too easily dismiss carols as "merely folk music" and somehow "less" than the elegant hymns of the choir. Rarely do we think of them as nuggets of theology, yet they sit in the backs of our minds quietly shaping our approach to the theology of the incarnation, Christmas and the structures of Christian believing. 
 For a good example of this process of memory, we need only look at the carol "We Three Kings". Despite its brevity, it presents botha theology of the significance of Jesus' birth anda fair amount of traditional Christian interpretation of the scriptural accounts of that birth. 
 Unlike many carols, we know exactly who composed it, as well as where and when. John Henry Hopkins Jr. (1820-91), rector of Christ's Church in Williamsport (Pennsylvania) published it in 1865, and it has been popular ever since. 
 "We Three Kings" is a standard element in Christmas liturgies and has become part of the drama of a myriad of nativity plays. 
 John Henry Hopkins: the carol is his claim to fame! 
 Yet a few moments' reflection shows that this carol brings out how Christians in the past have interpreted a biblical scene. It also presents an Easter-linked theology of the incarnation. 
 Oriental visitors 
 The three kings bringing gold, frankincense and myrrh is clearly a reference to the nativity scene in Matthew's Gospel (2,1-12). It is only in this gospel that the birth of Jesus is heralded by the arrivals of three visitors "from the east". 
 They have sought "the king of the Jews" in Jerusalem, having seen his star rising (presumably in the eastern sky). After they met with King Herod in Jerusalem, this star went ahead of them "until it stopped over the place where the child was". 
 "On entering the house, they saw the child and knelt down and paid him homage. Then, opening their treasure chests, they offered him gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh," the Gospel says. 
 The image is impressed on minds (usually conflated with the account in Luke) from Christmas cards and manger -- and even the opening scenes of "The Life of Brian". 
 This is actually the Epiphany, which we celebrate on January 6. 
 Indeed, when we think of this scene, we see these visitors as Eastern potentates -- "three kings from orient". This is confirmed by a range of cultural cues such as the shrine of the Three Kings in Köln Cathedral, inns named after Three Kings, and the tinsel crowns of nativity plays. 
 An English pub inspired by the memory of Matt 2:1 
 But where did the notion of the "three kings" come from? Our carol seems to know more than Matthew's Gospel. It merely says that magoi apo anatolón paregenonto (magoi arrived from the east)! 
 We translate magos as "wise man", but that is a faulty translation dating from the 16th century Renaissance when translators felt sure that the word could not mean here what it normally meant: "an astrologer". 
 Embarrassment at the role of astrologers in Matthew was not new. Saint Augustine had been annoyed by it in the late 4th century, but decided to brush it aside with the quip, "Christ was the fate of that star, not that star his fate!" 
 But, if everything in the New Testament was foreshadowed in the Old – this idea (though rarely even mentioned) was a basic article of Christian belief from the later first century (see Lk. 24.27) until the nineteenth century – then perhaps it could provide information on these unusual easterners who visited Jesus? 
 The answer, it seemed, was simply waiting to be found. In Psalm 72 there is a prayer in praise of a great future king who will bring justice (v. 2), deliverance (v. 4), have the creation as his servant (v. 5), and whose dominion should cover the earth (v. 8). 
 Surely, this must refer to the messiah, and so be a prophecy whose fuller meaning (sensus plenior) became available to those who knew of the birth of Jesus. This now being taken as the case, the psalm has kingsbowing down to Jesus and bringing him gifts: 
 the kings of Tarshish and the islands will pay him tribute, 
 The kings of Sheba and Saba will offer gifts; 
 all kings will do him homage, all nations become his servants (Ps. 72.10-11) 
 And indeed, the gift from Sheba is gold (v.15). 
 It all fitted perfectly. 
 The visitors are the kings of Tarshish, Sheba and Saba -- three royal gifts brought by three kings who bow before the child and bless the God of Israel (v.18). Moreover, all this fitted curiously well with Matthew's perspective on Jesus as the royal Son of God, as seen in his genealogy (1.1-17). 
 So the carol not merely represents the tradition of Christian imagining of the scene of the birth of Jesus, but it recalls for us a way of "doing Scripture" that is very alien to most western Christians today. 
 Moreover, the carol's chorus presents the star as being filled "with royal beauty bright". This picks up the royal theme of Matthew, while guiding those kings (and we who sing it) to "thy perfect light", which picks up the themes of light in Matthew 4,16 and Matthew 5,14-6. 
 Strange gifts 
 Every Christmas there seems to be yet another scientist who either "proves" that the star was a comet or something else (and so hopes "to prove" the whole of Christian faith) or else "disproves" that it could have happened (and so hopes "to prove" that Christianity is bunkum). 
 Between such fundamentalist simplicities lie those who know that the story is just that, an attempt to render into images, words and drama the mystery of God entering our human condition as an individual. 
 As such, the choice by Matthew of this set of three gifts (gold, incense and myrrh) was intended by him to convey something of the identity of Jesus. 
 The problem for Christians was that such symbolic messages are always liable to be ambiguous. Despite this, a common set of meanings evolved over the centuries. And these are as good as any other exegesis of Matthew. 
 The starting point was, once again, Psalm 72. If the new king was there presented with gold, then that was the symbolic value of the gift recorded in the Gospels. 
 Gold pointed to the royal identity of Jesus, the new and everlasting king (Ps 72.17-9), and this is the exact explanation found in the carol: 
 Born a king on Bethlehem plain, 
 Gold I bring to crown him again, 
 King for ever, ceasing never, 
 Over us all to reign. 
 The gift of incense seemed to follow on from the gold of Sheba. Matthew does not use the normal word for incense, thumiama. Instead, he uses libanos, which is traditionally rendered as "frankincense". 
 Now the word libanos brings to mind a phrase in the Greek version of Isaiah. 
 "All those from Sheba shall come. They shall bring gold and frankincense [libanos], and shall proclaim the praise of the Lord" (Isaiah 60). 
 This verse occurs in the context of all the nations hailing the new light that has arisen and was read as a prophecy of the Messiah. 
 Matthew, indeed, probably had these verses of Isaiah in mind as he composed his Gospel. But for later exegetes it looked as if the bits of the jigsaw were falling into place. 
 The incense offered as a gift was parallel to "the sweet incense" that the Law required to be offered to God (e.g. Lev. 16.12). The king's gift of incense was a mystical indicator, foretold by Isaiah, that the nations would recognize the divinity of Jesus. 
 Umpteen patristic sermons on this theme are then summarized in these words: 
 Incense owns a Deity nigh, 
 Prayer and praising all men raising, 
 Worship him, God on high. 
 In John 19,39 we are told that Nicodemus anointed Jesus' body with aloes and myrrh before placing it in the tomb late on Good Friday evening. Clearly, it was Jesus' death that was being indicated in this third gift. 
 Myrrh is mine; its bitter perfume 
 Breathes a life of gathering gloom; 
 Sorrowing, sighing, bleeding, dying, 
 Strange names 
 The Gospels are full of nameless people. 
 The centurion of faith (Mt 8), the "good" thief (Lk 23,42) and the woman whose deed is proclaimed "in her memory" but whose name is not recorded (Mk 14,3-9).... 
 The desire for more detail led to all these people receiving names over the centuries. So, if there were three kings, they also had to have names! 
 Traditionally they have been identified as Caspar, Melchior and Balthazar. 
 In some part of Europe, such as the Tyrol, the three names are recalled each year by placing this blessing over the door of the house 
 Christmas puzzle! 
 The three kings are remembered in many places in Europe by putting this inscription over the door of the house: 20 C + M + B 21. 
 Ask the local presbyter and he will tell you it means Christus mansionem benedicat -- May Christ bless this home. 
 But ask the people in the house and most will tell you it means 'Casper Melchior and Balthazar'! Either way, it is a recollection of the Christ-event. 
 Easter dimension 
 However, the most interesting aspect of the carol "We Three Kings" is that is does not end with the nativity scene. 
 Rather it concludes with Jesus risen and triumphant over the death, as foretold by the myrrh. 
 The last verse is group singing, right now, who behold Jesus gloriously risen, and so: 
 Heaven sing: "Alleluia"; 
 "Alleluia" the earth replies. 
 A Happy Christmas to all! 
 Thomas O'Loughlin is a presbyter of the Catholic Diocese of Arundel and Brighton and professor-emeritus of historical theology at the University of Nottingham (UK). His latest book is Eating Together, Becoming One: Taking Up Pope Francis's Call to Theologians (Liturgical Press, 2019). 
 Newsletter 
 Get the latest from La Croix International. Sign up to receive our daily newsletter. 
 SUPPORT LA CROIX INTERNATIONAL’S COMMUNITY OF READERS 
 Support La Croix International's unique blend of international Catholic journalism by making it available to people in Asia and Africa who can't afford a subscription and often don't have credit cards to pay for it either. 

 id="file23242762" filename="17-beautiful-quotes-about-blessings" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.christianquotes.info/top-quotes/17-beautiful-quotes-about-blessings/">
 Daily Quote & Devotional Each Day 
 17 Beautiful Quotes about Blessings 
 A blessing is usually defined as a special favor or unexpected benefit. This is so very true of God – He delights in showing favor and mercy to His children, and He wants us to have every benefit. It’s true that sometimes we have to look hard to see the benefit in a situation, but we can gain comfort from the knowledge that God is always desiring to bless us. Read these beautiful quotes and verses and be encouraged! 
 17 
 What can I give back to God for the blessings he's poured out on me? I'll lift high the cup of salvation - a toast to God! 
 The Lord has given us a table at which to feast, not an altar on which a victim is to be offered; He has not consecrated priests to make sacrifice, but servants to distribute the sacred feast. 
 Have you heard God's blessing in your inmost being? Are the words, 'You are my beloved child, in whom I delight' an endless source of joy and strength? Have you sensed, through the Holy Spirit, God speaking to you? That blessing- the blessing through the Spirit that is ours through Christ- is what Jacob received and it is the only remedy against idolatry. Only that blessing makes idols unnecessary. As with Jacob, we usually discover this only after a life of 'looking for blessings in all the wrong places.' It often takes an experience of crippling weakness for us to finally discover it. That is why so many of the most God-blessed people limp as they dance for joy. 
 And all these blessings shall come upon you and overtake you, if you obey the voice of the LORD your God. 
 - Deuteronomy 28:2 
 2 
 13 
 I refuse to become panicky, as I lift up my eyes to Him and accept it as coming from the throne of God for some great purpose of blessing to my own heart. 
 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places, 
 - Ephesians 1:3 
 2 
 11 
 God has a way of giving by the cartloads to those who give away by shovelfuls. 
 Christ frequently gives us the desires of our heart, though not at the peculiar time we desired, but a better time. 
 The blessing of the LORD makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it. 
 - Proverbs 10:22 
 6 
 8 
 An infinite God can give all of Himself to each of His children. He does not distribute Himself that each may have a part, but to each one He gives all of Himself as fully as if there were no others. 
 However many blessings we expect from God, His infinite liberality will always exceed all our wishes and our thoughts. 
 It is like the dew of Hermon, which falls on the mountains of Zion! For there the LORD has commanded the blessing, life forevermore. 
 - Psalm 133:3 
 103 
 3 
 Concentrate on counting your blessings and you'll have little time to count anything else. 
 Jesus is moved to happiness every time He sees that you appreciate what He has done for you. Grip His pierced hand and say to Him, "I thank Thee, Savior, because Thou has died for me." Thank Him likewise for all the other blessings He has showered upon you from day to day. It brings joy to Jesus. 
 God bestows His blessings without discrimination. The followers of Jesus are children of God, and they should manifest the family likeness by doing good to all, even to those who deserve the opposite. 
 I hope that you enjoyed this collection of quotes about the love and blessings of our God. Now go out into the world and share God’s love by being a blessing to someone else today! 
 × 
 Before you leave, see if one of these quotes speaks to you... 

 id="file23242842" filename="20161215-if-we-made-contact-with-aliens-how-would-religions-react" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20161215-if-we-made-contact-with-aliens-how-would-religions-react">
 The discovery of life on another planet might seem incompatible with faith in a deity. Yet many theologians are already open to the existence of extraterrestrials, argues the writer Brandon Ambrosino. 
 I 
 In 2014, Nasa awarded $1.1M to the Center for Theological Inquiry, an ecumenical research institute in New Jersey, to study “the societal implications of astrobiology . 
 Some were enraged. The Freedom From Religion Foundation, which promotes the division between Church and state, asked Nasa to revoke the grant, and threatened to sue if Nasa didn’t comply. While the FFR stated that their concern was the commingling of government and religious organisations, they also made it clear that they thought the grant was a waste of money. “Science should not concern itself with how its progress will impact faith-based beliefs.  
 The FFR’s argument might well be undermined, however, when the day comes that humanity has to respond to the discovery of aliens. Such a discovery would raise a series of questions that would exceed the bounds of science. For example, when we ask, “What is life?  are we asking a scientific question or a theological one? Questions about life’s origins and its future are complicated, and must be explored holistically, across disciplines. And that includes the way we respond to the discovery of aliens. 
 This is not just an idle fantasy: many scientists would now argue that the detection of extraterrestrial life is more a question of when, not if. 
 There are several reasons for this confidence, but a main one has to do with the speed at which scientists have been discovering planets outside of our own Solar System. In 2000, astronomers knew of about 50 of these ‘exoplanets’. By 2013, they had found almost 850, located in over 800 planetary systems. That number may reach one million by the year 2045, says David Weintraub, associate professor of Astronomy at Vanderbilt University, and author of Religions and Extraterrestrial Life. “We can quite reasonably expect that the number of known exoplanets will soon become, like the stars, almost uncountable,  he writes. Of those discovered so far, more than 20 are Earth-size exoplanets that occupy a “habitable  zone around their star, including the most recently discovered Proxima b, which orbits Proxima Centauri. 
 The upshot is that the more we’re able to peer into space, the more certain we become that our planet isn’t the only one suitable for life. 
 As astronomers locate more and more exoplanets beyond the solar system, some believe that the discovery of extraterrestrial life will be inevitable (Credit: Getty Images) 
 Space exploration leads directly to religious and philosophical questions – Carl Sagan 
 With few exceptions, most of the discussions about Seti (the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence) tend to stay in the domain of the hard sciences. But the implications of Seti extend well beyond biology and physics, reaching to the humanities and philosophy and even theology. As Carl Sagan has pointed out in (the now out-of-print book) The Cosmic Question, “space exploration leads directly to religious and philosophical questions . We would need to consider whether our faiths could accommodate these new beings – or if it should shake our beliefs to the core. 
 Working out these questions might be called exotheology or astro-theology, terms defined by Ted Peters, Professor Emeritus in Theology at Pacific Lutheran Theological Seminary, to refer to “speculation on the theological significance of extraterrestrial life . As he notes, Peters isn’t the first or only one to use the term, which dates back at least 300 years, to a 1714 publication titled ‘Astro-theology, or a Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God From a Survey of the Heavens’. 
 How unique are we? 
 So what issues might the discovery of intelligent aliens raise? Let’s start with the question of our uniqueness – an issue that has troubled both theologians and scientists. Guiding Seti are three principles, as Paul Davies explains in the book Are We Alone? First, there’s the principle of nature’s uniformity, which claims that the physical processes seen on Earth can be found throughout the Universe. This means that the same processes that produce life here produce life everywhere. 
 Second is the principle of plenitude, which affirms that everything that is possible will be realised. For the purposes of Seti, the second principle claims that as long as there are no impediments to life forming, then life will form; or, as Arthur Lovejoy, the American philosopher who coined the term, puts it, “no genuine possibility of being can remain unfulfilled . That’s because, claims Sagan, “The origin of life on suitable planets seems built into the chemistry of the Universe.  
 The third, the mediocrity principle, claims that there is nothing special about Earth’s status or position in the Universe. This could present the greatest challenge to the major Abrahamic religions, which teach that human beings are purposefully created by God and occupy a privileged position in relation to other creatures. 
 Some people of faith may find that the discovery of aliens challenges their sense of human uniqueness (Credit: Getty Images) 
 In some ways, our modern scientific world was formed by the recognition of our own mediocrity, as David Weintraub notes in the book Religion and Extraterrestrial Life: “When in 1543 C.E. Copernicus hurled the Earth into orbit around the Sun, the subsequent intellectual revolution … swept the discarded remnants of the Aristotelian, geocentric Universe into the trash bin of history.  
 The Copernican revolution, as it would later come to be understood, laid the groundwork for scientists, like Davies, to eventually claim that ours is “a typical planet around a typical star in a typical galaxy . Sagan puts it even more startlingly: “We find that we live on an insignificant planet of a humdrum star lost in a galaxy tucked away in some forgotten corner of a universe in which there are far more galaxies than people.  
 But how could a believer reconcile this with their faith that humans are the crowning achievement of God’s creation?. How could humans believe they were the apple of their creator’s eye if their planet was just one of billions? 
 The discovery of intelligent aliens could have a similar Copernican effect on human’s self-understanding. Would the discovery make believers feel insignificant, and as a consequence, cause people to question their faith? 
 According to the Talmud, God spends his night flying throughout 18,000 worlds 
 I would argue that this concern is misguided. The claim that God is involved with and moved by humans has never required an Earth-centric theology. The Psalms, sacred to both Jews and Christians, claim that God has given names to all the stars. According to the Talmud, God spends his night flying throughout 18,000 worlds. And Islam insists that “all things in the heavens and on the Earth  are Allah’s, as the Koran says, implying that his rule extends well beyond one tiny planet. The same texts are unequivocally clear that human beings are special to God, who seems fairly able to multitask. 
 Depending on how literally you read their message, some holy texts do not exclude the possibility of alien life (Credit: Getty Images) 
 Second, we don’t reserve the word “special  only for unrepeatable, unique, isolated phenomena. As Peters says, the discovery of life elsewhere in the Universe would not compromise God’s love for Earth life, “just as a parent’s love for a child is not compromised because that child has a brother or sister . If you believe in a God, why assume he is only able to love a few of his starchildren? 
 Revelation 
 But do the religious texts themselves mention the possibility of alien life? “What is most basic in religion,  writes Catholic priest and theologian Thomas O’Meara, “is the affirmation of some contact within and yet beyond human nature.  For Jews, Christians, and Muslims, this involves a written revelation, albeit one that is contingent upon the specific historical situations in which they initially circulated. The best theologies recognise these limitations. Some don’t, however, and for those believers that adhere to them, the discovery of ETs might prove initially threatening. 
 Evangelist Billy Graham told the National Enquirer he “firmly  believed God created alien life “far away in space  
 Weintraub thinks Evangelicals might have a difficult time with Seti, because they approach their Scriptures with a high degree of literalism. Their hermeneutical heritage extends back to Luther’s Sola Scriptura, a Reformation rallying cry that affirms “Scripture alone  is necessary for understanding God’s plan for salvation. (One notable exception here is evangelist Billy Graham who in 1976 told the National Enquirer he “firmly  believed God created alien life “far away in space .) These believers maintain that any other writing or idea must be evaluated and judged by the Bible. Take, for example, Darwin’s theory of evolution, which some Evangelicals reject on the grounds that the Bible says God created the world in seven days. 
 The worldview of these believers might be summed up in the Christian slogan, “God said it, I believe it, that settles it!  Were you to ask one of these Christians if she believed in ET life, her first instinct would probably be to consider what the Bible says about God’s creation. Not finding any positive affirmation of alien life, she might conclude, like creationist Jonathan Safarti, that humans are alone in the Universe. “Scripture strongly implies that no intelligent life exists elsewhere,  he wrote in an article in Science and Theology News. Granted, she might remain open to the discovery of alien life, but she’ll have to revise her notion of divine revelation in one very big way: by tempering it with some epistemic humility. 
 Second, she would have to deeply reflect on the concept of the Incarnation, the Christian belief that God was fully and uniquely present in a first-century human called Jesus of Nazareth. According to Christianity, salvation can be achieved only by Jesus’ death and resurrection. All paths to God, in effect, go through him. But what does that mean for other civilisations whirling around out there in the Universe, completely unaware of Jesus’ story? 
 Believers may need to question whether their religion - and its routes to salvation - would apply to all alien beings (Credit: Getty Images) 
 Thomas Paine famously tackled this question in his 1794 Age of Reason, in a discussion of multiple worlds. A belief in an infinite plurality of worlds, argued Paine, “renders the Christian system of faith at once little and ridiculous and scatters it in the mind like feathers in the air . It isn’t possible to affirm both simultaneously, he wrote, and “he who thinks that he believes in both has thought but little of either.  Isn’t it preposterous to believe God “should quit the care of all the rest  of the worlds he’s created, to come and die in this one? On the other hand, “are we to suppose that every world in the boundless creation  had their own similar visitations from this God? If that’s true, Paine concludes, then that person would “have nothing else to do than to travel from world to world, in an endless succession of deaths, with scarcely a momentary interval of life . 
 In a nutshell: if Christian salvation is only possible to creatures whose worlds have experienced an Incarnation from God, then that means God’s life is spent visiting the many worlds throughout the cosmos where he is promptly crucified and resurrected. But this seems eminently absurd to Paine, which is one of the reasons he rejects Christianity. 
 But there’s another way of looking at the problem, which doesn’t occur to Paine: maybe God’s incarnation within Earth’s history “works  for all creatures throughout the Universe. This is the option George Coyne, Jesuit priest and former director of the Vatican Observatory, explores in his 2010 book Many Worlds: The New Universe, Extraterrestrial Life and the Theological Implications. 
 “How could he be God and leave extra-terrestrials in their sin? God chose a very specific way to redeem human beings. He sent his only Son, Jesus, to them… Did God do this for extra-terrestrials? There is deeply embedded in Christian theology… the notion of the universality of God’s redemption and even the notion that all creation, even the inanimate, participates in some way in his redemption.  
 There’s yet another possibility. Salvation itself might be exclusively an Earth concept. Theology doesn’t require us to believe that sin affects all intelligent life, everywhere in the Universe. Maybe humans are uniquely bad. Or, to use religious language, maybe Earth is the only place unfortunate enough to have an Adam and Eve. Who is to say our star-siblings are morally compromised and in need of spiritual redemption? Maybe they have attained a more perfect spiritual existence than we have at this point in our development. 
 Many faiths require specific rituals associated with spiritual experiences (Credit: Getty Images) 
 As Davies notes, spiritual thinking requires an animal to be both self-conscious and “to have reached a level of intelligence where it can assess the consequences of its actions . On Earth, this kind of cognition is at best a few million years old. If life exists elsewhere in the Universe, then it’s very unlikely that it’s at the exact same stage in its evolution as we are. And given the immense timeline of the existence of the Universe, it’s likely that at least some of this life is older, and therefore farther along in their evolution than we. Therefore, he concludes, “we could expect to be among the least spiritually advanced creatures in the Universe.  
 If Davies is right, then contrary to popular works of literature like The Sparrow, humans won’t be the ones teaching their star-siblings about God. The education will go quite the other way. 
 Let’s note that this possibility doesn’t invalidate Earth religions’ claims of divine revelation. There is no need to imagine that God reveals the same truths in the same way to all intelligent life in the Universe. Other civilisations could understand the Divine in their own myriad ways, all of which could be compatible with each other. 
 Identity 
 But what about the divisions between faiths? How would the discovery influence religious identity? A 1974 story by Phillip Klass, On Venus We Have a Rabbi!, invited Jews, and all religious people, to consider this question. At some point in the future, goes the story, the Jewish community on planet Venus holds the Universe’s first Interstellar Neozionist Conference. In attendance are an intelligent alien species named Bublas, who have traveled from a faraway star named Rigel. The Jews at the conference are bewildered by the physical appearance of the Bulbas, what with their gray spots and tentacles. They decide the Bulbas can’t really be human, and therefore they can’t be Jewish. 
 A Rabbinical court is called to think about how Jews should respond to their new visitors. What happens, they ask, if some day humans come across alien creatures who want to be Jewish? “Do we say, no, you’re not entirely acceptable?  
 The rabbis conclude that isn’t a good response, and suggest a paradoxical way for the Venusians to look at it: “There are Jews – and there are Jews. The Bulbas belong in the second group.  
 The comedy of the story is heightened by what we recognise as a certain tribalism inherent to religion. The announcement of any identity has the potential to split the world into groups: us and them. But when religion is involved, that separation takes on a cosmic dimension: us and them, and God is on our side. This has always been one of the challenges of cross-cultural conversion, which is often tasked with negotiating, though not dissolving, such boundaries. 
 A sense of location is also critical to many religious practices - meaning that those beliefs could be bound to life on our planet (Credit: Getty Images) 
 Perhaps this is a bigger challenge to Judaism and Islam than it is for some forms of Christianity, which place less emphasis on daily rituals than other religions. Think of Islam, which requires its adherents to take up embodied behaviors throughout the year. Unlike Christianity, whose founder eradicated the necessity of location for religious experience, Islam is a very placed religion. Prayers are said facing Mecca, at five specific times throughout the day, and are physicalised through bowing and kneeling. Fasting is required at specific times, as is a pilgrimage to Mecca for all Muslims who are able. Judaism, too, has its own fasts, and – though it’s not a requirement – a concept of pilgrimage, which is its birthright trip, taglit, to the Holy Land. Contemporary Judaism, however, is not as dependent on location as Islam, given its tragic history with exile and diaspora. 
 What, then, would it take for an alien to be considered a participant in an Earth religion? What would she be required to do? Pray five times a day? Perhaps her planet does not rotate exactly as ours, and her days are much shorter – would she be expected to pray as often as Muslims on Earth? Would she have to be baptised? Receive communion? Build a tent for Sukkot? Though we imagine aliens to have a similar physical structure to us, there’s no reason to believe they have physical bodies. Maybe they don’t. Would that restrict their conversion options? 
 This may seem to be a bit of frivolous exotheology, but the point is this: all of our religious identities are Earth-centric ones. There’s nothing wrong with that (so long as we don’t collapse the Universe down to our finitude). Here’s how Rabbi Jeremy Kalmanofsky puts it: “Religion is the human, social response to transcendence … Normative Judaism provides an excellent, time-tested path for sanctifying our minds, morals, and bodies, refining us as a people, improving the world, correlating our lives to the infinite God unfolding on the finite Earth.  
 His upshot? “I am Jewish. God is not.  
 The rabbi’s theory can help us think about our neighbours in outer space, and our neighbours right here on this planet. If religion is a human response to divinity – even if that response is taught and initiated by divinity – then it’s obvious that those responses would differ according to the contexts in which they take shape. If Western Christians can learn to respect the religious experiences of good-willed aliens who are in their own ways responding to the divine, maybe they’ll be able to apply the same principles as they learn to live more peaceably with Muslims on Earth. And vice versa. 
 “In a billion solar systems,  writes O’Meara, “the forms of love, created and uncreated, would not be limited. Realisations of divine life would not be in contradiction with each other or with creation.  
 The end of religion? 
 If we wake up tomorrow morning to the news that we’ve made contact with intelligent aliens, how will religion respond? Some believe that the discovery will set us on a path the end goal of which will be to outgrow religion. One notable study conducted by Peters found that twice as many non-religious people than religious people think that the discovery of alien life will spell trouble for earthly religion (69% to 34%, respectively). 
 But it’s ahistorical to assume that religion is too weak to survive in a world with aliens. That’s because, as Peters points out, this claim underestimates “the degree of adaptation that has already taken place.  With few notable exceptions – creationism, violent fundamentalism, gay marriage – religion has often been able to adapt without much fuss to various paradigm shifts it’s encountered. Surely its re-inventiveness, its adaptability is a testament to the fact that there is something about religion that resonates with humans at a basic level. 
 Certain aspects of religion will have to be reconsidered, but not totally abandoned, as O’Meara notes. “If being and revelation and grace come to worlds other than Earth, that modifies in a modest way Christian self-understanding  – and, we might add, all religious self-understanding. However, he says, “It is not a question of adding or subtracting but of seeing what is basic in a new way.  
 Many religions have always believed God names the stars. Is it really a stretch to believe God names the stars’ inhabitants, too? And that they might possibly each have their own names for God? 
 -- 
 Brandon Ambrosino has written for the New York Times, Boston Globe, The Atlantic, Politico, Economist, and other publications. He lives in Delaware, and is a graduate student in theology at Villanova University. 
 If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called “If You Only Read 6 Things This Week . A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Earth, Culture, Capital, Travel and Autos, delivered to your inbox every Friday. 

 id="file23242844" filename="2018-12-8-1544309811" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.essaysauce.com/religious-studies-and-theology-essays/2018-12-8-1544309811/">
 Overall rating: 0 out of 5 based on 0 reviews. 
 Anonymous 
 Text preview of this essay: 
 This page of the essay has 1,793 words. Download the full version above. 
 Rites of passage in the Jewish religion and culture vary between families and society. These rituals mark the transitions of a person throughout their lives, integrating cultural experiences with biological destiny. There are three phases in accordance to the few rites of passage, separation or the preliminary phase that signifies removal from the past and is the beginning of the passage. The second is transition or the threshold in which there is a ceremony and reaction from the individual that is going through the passage. The third is incorporation or inclusion in ceremonies or rituals in the synagogue. Most of these rituals have altered over the centuries and have become more distinct within different denominations of Judaism. They are performed within a group or societal setting to strengthen ties with the temple. Specific aspects of some rituals have influenced other religious ceremonies around the world. The life events covered include birth, naming, bar/bat mitzvah or societal introduction, marriage and death. In this paper, only the life cycle rites of passage that pertain to society will be argued and compared. 
 The first defining rite of passage is birth as it is also the beginning of life biologically. In order emphasize the beginning of life religiously, there are ceremonies that occur shortly after birth. For a male, circumcision is one of the most defining rituals as it is meant to initiate the son into the Covenant of Abraham. This occurs on the eighth day after birth in the presence of friends and family and is accompanied by a celebration or feast. There is no parallel for daughters when it comes to circumcision or an introduction to the world. In order to start a tradition, two women of the Reconstructionist Rabbinic College created the Brit B’not Yisrael which translates roughly to a covenant ceremony for the Daughters of Israel. It began in the 1970’s during the women’s rights and liberation movement and was designed as a home-centered celebration. It still was not held in the same regard as circumcision ceremonies held for sons in the Jewish faith and culture. Another ritual that corresponds with birth is the naming ceremonies. When named, it is individualized and incorporated into society. A prevailing question posed is with whom does the authority to name lie? Although naming ceremonies are used to separate those who are inside and those who are outside of the culture, the act of naming has historically been reserved mainly for the men (Leissner 140). The Hebrew Bible mentions naming by outsiders such as God, prophets or even neighbors and later on reverts to the parents. There is also much discussion on which parent reserves the right to name the child first. For this honor, there are many circumstances and scenarios of which an individual parent or both may name the child. In this case, the first son has carried most of the naming importance over the centuries as it coincides with the circumcision ceremonies. These scenarios include being named by the mother alone, by the father alone, by both and incorporating two names, as well as after the mother’s father; deciding factors vary per cultural preference. As the son’s naming traditions hold more background, there is little to no mentions of daughters being named. The Bible also does not mention many daughters being bestowed names excluding the Book of Job (Job 42:14). Naming in the Bible signifies endowment with a role to play in history. Connecting back to patriarchal tendencies of naming being reserved for men, Adam naming Eve in Genesis 2:23 gave him dominion over her while they were meant to be equals. In modern times, naming is a cause for celebration and feast while done on the Sabbath with the congregation. There is a separation of sexes with respect to ceremonies of birth and naming since those rituals have been taking place since the beginning of Judaism and originated in a patriarchal society. 
 Transitioning from adolescence to adulthood is incorporated into the ritual ceremonies of the Bar/Bat Mitzvah, roughly translated to Son/Daughter of Commandment. It is a formal acknowledgement of growth and gives an individual a sense of transition or ceremonial recognition that is needed for that life event. This correlates to the first phase of passage of which one acknowledges the removal of the past and the start to a new passage. Aaron B. Seidman states that it is the introduction to the more responsible forms of worship and is recognized as a step towards social maturation. Though a Bar/Bat Mitzvah is a celebration, it is also a rite of passage into adulthood and therefore aligns with the second phase of passage where there is a ceremony to mark the transition. It is preceded by education and followed by new responsibilities at home and in synagogue. For a girl, it is done at age twelve while boys are celebrated at age thirteen in correspondence with the age of Ishmael when he was circumcised (Genesis 17:25). At these ages, they are considered adults and can now participate in events or ceremonies in synagogue that require adulthood. This aspect relates to the incorporation phase of rite of passages as they have earned their place in the Temple. This tradition can aide the youth in maintaining steadiness and perspective while focusing on life-direction and relating to others in a more meaningful way. Though important socially, this rite of passage is made up in most ways for it was not commanded nor specified by any laws. 
 The next rite of passage is marriage or a wedding ceremony. For women, there is no other single universal rite of passage in Jewish traditions and rituals. It connects back to baby naming ceremonies where prayers included blessings for the baby girl to grow, be married and bare sons. This blessing has been historically constant throughout various cultural traditions across most religions. For example, in medieval times the wife had a singular purpose of baring sons or heirs to carry the family name. This is still true in some societies today as the first male son holds the status of heir. The Mishnah, Written Oral Law, states that a woman is acquired in three ways, money, deed and intercourse. The economics of money historically began with a brideprice which has been exempt and taken over by a dowry. Virtue was an aspect that was taken very seriously when betrothed, even checks were done by Rabbi at the request of the husband post ceremony. Marriages were arranged through parents mutually agreeing based upon deed and dowry. Brides were to be checked by groom’s female family members while focusing on beauty which is an asset and pre-marital virginity. It is said in Genesis 2:18 that “it is not good for a man to be alone  meaning for them to take a wife and provide protection. Historically, women were expected to marry when they are teens while men would usually marry in their thirties or younger. Men married after they have completed Torah study which leads to an older age for them to marry. Most laws are laid out in the Nashim or “Women  chapter in the Mishnah stating matrimonial law. 
 The last rite of passage is the last moment of life and is the ultimate transition, death. This ritual has two sides, the deceased and the mourners. It is a highly choreographed event which includes a speedy burial for there was concern of the freshness of the body. It was to be washed, shrouded or wrapped, and on occasion burned. There is no distinction of class or status for a funeral or burial. This two-sided rite of passage begins with the deceased where they transition out of the earthly world and ends with the survivors, also known as mourners. It is a state of transition brought on by grief and expectation. For example: the death of a parent or leadership role leaves an empty spot and thus needs to be filled which leads to the transitory rite of passage. Only after the burial does the surviving kin become mourners. Mourning activities and rituals extend from seven days to a year. Immediately after the funeral the family sits in their home for seven days while the community comes to them, this is called Shivah or “Seven . After those seven days end, thirty days of lesser and moderate mourning takes place. Once the thirty days end, there is a remembrance one year after death where the “Mourner’s Kaddish  is prayed at the end of a service and concludes with ways of praising God. Some funeral rites have translated on to other religious traditions. At a Jewish funeral, the family wears specific attire including rips in clothing to show death. This has disappeared over time and in turn the men wear black ties and the women take black handkerchiefs. The black attire has influenced popular Christian traditions of wearing black as a sign of mourning and a continuation of wearing black for an extended time to show respect for the deceased. The final rite of passage in the life cycle has characteristics of both societal ritual practices and familiar practices, though each play a part and work together to instill tradition. 
 All five of these major life events as a whole join to create the life cycle rite of passages. They are comprised of biological and cultural experiences that one goes through in the course of their lifetime. Each encompasses parts of the three phases, passage, transition and incorporation in different ways. The three steps of any rite of passage describes what each life event is about, leaving the past behind, transitioning into a new part of life, and becoming included in all aspects of society and familiar duties possible. Most events are formal acknowledgements signifying an individual’s incorporation into society beginning with birth and ending with death. Although some traditions have failed or been phased out, the overarching symbol has been integrated in another. There are standing questions brought forward as a result of the beginning of most religious rituals were formed during a time of patriarchs. Men were seen as more important and aspects of traditions highlight that importance. As seen with the female birth rituals, new traditions have been created out of societal changes such as the women’s liberation movement in the nineteen-seventies and will continue to change and be created. Rite of passage events are overall ways to celebrate life with the opportunity to dance, sing, tell stories, grieve, share joys and experience life with one another. 
 ...(download the rest of the essay above) 
 About this essay: 
 If you use part of this page in your own work, you need to provide a citation, as follows: 
 Essay Sauce, Rites of passage in the Jewish religion and culture. Available from:<https://www.essaysauce.com/religious-studies-and-theology-essays/2018-12-8-1544309811/> [Accessed 20-01-22]. 
 These Religious studies and Theology essays have been submitted to us by students in order to help you with your studies. 
 * This essay may have been previously published on Essay.uk.com at an earlier date. 
 Review this essay: 
 Please note that the above text is only a preview of this essay. 
 We use cookies on our website to give you the most relevant experience by remembering your preferences and repeat visits. By clicking “Accept All , you consent to the use of ALL the cookies. However, you may visit "Cookie Settings" to provide a controlled consent. 
 Privacy Overview 
 This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may affect your browsing experience. 
 Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. These cookies ensure basic functionalities and security features of the website, anonymously. 
 Duration 
 Description 
 cookielawinfo-checkbox-advertisement 
 The cookie is set by GDPR cookie consent to record the user consent for the cookies in the category "Advertisement". 
 cookielawinfo-checkbox-analytics 
 11 months 
 This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Analytics". 
 cookielawinfo-checkbox-functional 
 11 months 
 The cookie is set by GDPR cookie consent to record the user consent for the cookies in the category "Functional". 
 cookielawinfo-checkbox-necessary 
 11 months 
 This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookies is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Necessary". 
 cookielawinfo-checkbox-others 
 11 months 
 This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Other. 
 cookielawinfo-checkbox-performance 
 11 months 
 This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Performance". 
 viewed_cookie_policy 
 11 months 
 The cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data. 
 Functional cookies help to perform certain functionalities like sharing the content of the website on social media platforms, collect feedbacks, and other third-party features. 
 Duration 
 Description 
 na_id 
 This cookie is set by Addthis.com to enable sharing of links on social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter 
 na_rn 
 1 month 
 This cookie is used to recognize the visitor upon re-entry. This cookie allows to collect information on user behaviour and allows sharing function provided by Addthis.com 
 na_sc_e 
 1 month 
 This cookie is used to recognize the visitor upon re-entry. This cookie allows to collect information on user behaviour and allows sharing function provided by Addthis.com 
 na_sr 
 1 month 
 This cookie is set by Addthis.com. This cookie is used for sharing of links on social media platforms. 
 na_srp 
 1 minute 
 This cookie is used to recognize the visitor upon re-entry. This cookie allows to collect information on user behaviour and allows sharing function provided by Addthis.com 
 na_tc 
 1 year 1 month 
 This cookie is set by the provider Addthis. This cookie is used for social media sharing tracking service. 
 ouid 
 1 year 1 month 
 The cookie is set by Addthis which enables the content of the website to be shared across different networking and social sharing websites. 
 Performance cookies are used to understand and analyze the key performance indexes of the website which helps in delivering a better user experience for the visitors. 
 Duration 
 Description 
 d 
 Analytical cookies are used to understand how visitors interact with the website. These cookies help provide information on metrics the number of visitors, bounce rate, traffic source, etc. 
 Duration 
 Description 
 __gads 
 This cookie is set by Google and stored under the name dounleclick.com. This cookie is used to track how many times users see a particular advert which helps in measuring the success of the campaign and calculate the revenue generated by the campaign. These cookies can only be read from the domain that it is set on so it will not track any data while browsing through another sites. 
 _ga 
 2 years 
 This cookie is installed by Google Analytics. The cookie is used to calculate visitor, session, campaign data and keep track of site usage for the site's analytics report. The cookies store information anonymously and assign a randomly generated number to identify unique visitors. 
 _gat_gtag_UA_11754237_44 
 1 minute 
 This cookie is set by Google and is used to distinguish users. 
 _gid 
 1 day 
 This cookie is installed by Google Analytics. The cookie is used to store information of how visitors use a website and helps in creating an analytics report of how the website is doing. The data collected including the number visitors, the source where they have come from, and the pages visted in an anonymous form. 
 Advertisement cookies are used to provide visitors with relevant ads and marketing campaigns. These cookies track visitors across websites and collect information to provide customized ads. 
 Duration 
 Description 
 ab 
 This domain of this cookie is owned by agkn. The cookie is used for targeting and advertising purposes. 
 CMPRO 
 3 months 
 This cookie is set by Casalemedia and is used for targeted advertisement purposes. 
 DSID 
 1 hour 
 This cookie is setup by doubleclick.net. This cookie is used by Google to make advertising more engaging to users and are stored under doubleclick.net. It contains an encrypted unique ID. 
 fr 
 3 months 
 The cookie is set by Facebook to show relevant advertisments to the users and measure and improve the advertisements. The cookie also tracks the behavior of the user across the web on sites that have Facebook pixel or Facebook social plugin. 
 id 
 1 year 1 month 
 The main purpose of this cookie is targeting and advertising. It is used to create a profile of the user's interest and to show relevant ads on their site. This Cookie is set by DoubleClick which is owned by Google. 
 IDE 
 1 year 24 days 
 Used by Google DoubleClick and stores information about how the user uses the website and any other advertisement before visiting the website. This is used to present users with ads that are relevant to them according to the user profile. 
 mdata 
 1 year 1 month 
 The domain of this cookie is owned by Media Innovation group. This cookie registers a unique ID used to identify a visitor on their revisit inorder to serve them targeted ads. 
 ov 
 1 year 1 month 
 This cookie is set by the provider mookie1.com. This cookie is used for serving the user with relevant content and advertisement. 
 pxrc 
 2 months 
 The purpose of the cookie is to identify a visitor to serve relevant advertisement. 
 test_cookie 
 15 minutes 
 This cookie is set by doubleclick.net. The purpose of the cookie is to determine if the user's browser supports cookies. 
 uid 
 1 year 1 month 
 This cookie is used to measure the number and behavior of the visitors to the website anonymously. The data includes the number of visits, average duration of the visit on the website, pages visited, etc. for the purpose of better understanding user preferences for targeted advertisments. 
 uuid 
 3 months 
 To optimize ad relevance by collecting visitor data from multiple websites such as what pages have been loaded. 
 Other uncategorized cookies are those that are being analyzed and have not been classified into a category as yet. 

 id="file23242675" filename="21231" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://extranet.generalconvention.org/staff/files/download/21231">
Enriching Our Worship:
Rites for Blessing Relationships

As presented to the 79th General Convention, 2018

Table of Contents
I. Introduction
II. Faith, Hope, and Love: Theological Resources for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships
Preface
Overview: Theological Reflection on Same-Sex Relationships
1. The Church’s Call: A Focus on Mission
2. The Church’s Joy: A Theology of Blessing
3. The Church’s Life: Covenantal Relationship
4. The Church’s Challenge: Christian Unity and Biblical Interpretation
Responses to “Faith, Hope, and Love 
a. Thomas E. Breidenthal
b. John E. Goldingay
c. Deirdre Good
d. Dora Rudo Mbuwayesango
e. George R. Sumner
f. Fredrica Harris Thompsett
III. Hearing, Seeing, and Declaring New Things:
Pastoral Resources for Preparing Couples for a Liturgy of Blessing
Overview: Pastoral Care for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
1. Available Resources: Materials for Pastoral Preparation
2. Particular Issues Affecting Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
3. Presenters
4. Outline of Pre-Blessing Preparation
Handouts
1. Theological Reflection on Covenantal Relationship: Spiritual Practice for
Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
2. Declaration of Intention for Lifelong Covenant
3. About Presenters—For the Couple
4. Information for Presenters
5. Model Congregational Guidelines
IV. The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant
V. A Rite of Blessing, Not Marriage
VI. The Blessing of a Lifelong Relationship
VII. Appendix: A Review of General Convention Legislation

Page 2 of 106

I. INTRODUCTION
The rites in this resource are designed for use with couples for whom the Church’s liturgies for
marriage are not available or not suitable. During the 2015-2018 triennium, the Task Force on the
Study of Marriage created by the 2015 General Convention heard Episcopalians express the desire
for such liturgies as a pastoral response to people in various circumstance.
Resources for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships
Since 2012, The Episcopal Church has provided “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong
Covenant  for blessing same-sex relationships. The Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music
(SCLM) developed this liturgy in response to Resolution 2009-C056, which directed the commission
to “collect and develop theological and liturgical resources  for blessing same-sex relationships. In
response to comments by those who used the 2012 rite, the SCLM made some revisions to the
resource. In Resolution 2015-A054, the 2015 General Convention authorized this revised rite for use.
In a ruling issued on June 26, 2015, the Supreme Court of the United States held that same-sex
couples may now exercise the right to marry in all States. However, several dioceses of The
Episcopal Church are in civil jurisdictions outside the United States where the marriage of same-sex
persons is not allowed. “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant  is intended for use in
these contexts.
In addition to the liturgy, this resource includes other material that the SCLM developed. A
theological essay setting forth scriptural and theological foundations for blessing same-sex
relationships was developed during the 2009-2012 triennium in response to Resolution 2009-C056,
and responses from theologians representing different disciplines and different theological
perspectives were gathered during the 2012-2015 triennium. The SCLM also prepared a pastoral
resource that includes a discussion of matters particularly relevant to couples who were gender and
sexual minorities and an outline for preparation for a liturgical blessing was developed. These
theological and pastoral resources are reproduced here to supplement the liturgical blessing.
Resources for Other Blessings of Relationships
As the Task Force on the Study of Marriage during the 2015-2018 triennium studied trends in
marriage today and listened to the experiences of Episcopalians, the Task Force heard some people
express the desire for a liturgy that would be available throughout The Episcopal Church, to
respond to other significant pastoral concerns:
Page 3 of 106

1. Couples who desire to form and to formalize a special relationship with another that is
unconditional and lifelong, but is nevertheless something different than a marriage in that it
does not include the merging of property, finances, or other legal encumbrances. In this,
they have in mind the needs and rights of children of a former marriage; a desire to honor
the work and intention of their former spouse; a desire wisely to maintain their ability to
support themselves with shelter, food, and health care, because they know that while a
subsequent marriage would cancel the benefits they receive from their former spouse, if
their new partner dies before they do they will be left without any pension or health care at
all.
2. Couples for whom the requirement to furnish identification to obtain a marriage license
could result in civil legal penalties including deportation, because of their immigration status.
In response, The Task Force on the Study of Marriage revised “The Witnessing and Blessing of a
Lifelong Covenant,  recognizing that a rite that closely resembles marriage could create civil legal
difficulties for some couples. A brief essay introduces pastoral and legal issues in such
circumstances.
The rite is intended solely as a religious rite of blessing. It is not to be used for mere convenience, to
avoid the ordinary risks of relationship. The officiating clergyperson must discern carefully with the
couple to determine whether this rite of blessing or a legally binding marriage is most appropriate.
The Task Force strongly encourages couples contemplating using this rite for a blessing of their
relationship to seek civil legal counsel before the celebration.

Page 4 of 106

II. FAITH, HOPE, AND LOVE
Theological Resources for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships
prepared by
The Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music, 2009-2012

Contents
Faith, Hope, and Love: Theological Resources for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships
Preface
Overview: Theological Reflection on Same-Sex Relationships
1. The Church’s Call: A Focus on Mission
2. The Church’s Joy: A Theology of Blessing
3. The Church’s Life: Covenantal Relationship
4. The Church’s Challenge: Christian Unity and Biblical Interpretation
Responses to “Faith, Hope, and Love 
a. Thomas E. Breidenthal
b. John E. Goldingay
c. Deirdre Good
d. Dora Rudo Mbuwayesango
e. George R. Sumner
f. Fredrica Harris Thompsett

Page 5 of 106

Preface
The Episcopal Church has been seeking, in various ways and over the last thirty years, to celebrate the
goodness of God, the grace of Christ, and the gifts of the Holy Spirit in the lives of our brothers and sisters
who are gay and lesbian. A series of General Convention resolutions during that time (1976–A069; 1985–D082;
1991–A104; 1994–C020; 1994–C042; 1997–C003; 2000–D039; 2003–C051) has now led the Church to ask the
Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music to “collect and develop theological and liturgical resources  for
the blessing of same-sex relationships (Resolution 2009–C056). In response to that call, we offer this essay as
a theological resource and invite the wider Church to reflect with us on how God is working today in the
committed relationships of same-sex couples.
For generations the Church has celebrated and blessed the faithful, committed, lifelong, monogamous
relationships of men and women united in the bonds of Holy Matrimony. In the Episcopal Church, the marriage
relationship is held in high regard, included as a “sacramental rite  by some,1 and as one of the seven
sacraments by others. The Commission has discovered in its work in response to Resolution 2009–C056 that
any consideration of the blessing of faithful, committed, lifelong, monogamous relationships of same-sex
couples cannot ignore the parallels to marriage, whether from practical, theological, or liturgical perspectives.
While this reality may well be inviting the Church to deeper conversation regarding marriage, the similarities
between marriage and the blessing of same-sex unions also illuminate our discussions in this resource.
For some Episcopalians, this material will resonate well with their long-standing experience and theological
reflection; for others, the call from the 2009 General Convention represents a new and perhaps perplexing
moment in the life of our Church. We take that difference seriously. To the best of our ability, given the
mandate of Resolution 2009–C056 to “collect and develop theological and liturgical resources  for the
blessing of same-sex relationships, we address those who are eager to receive this theological resource while
also acknowledging that others have deep reservations about proceeding in this direction. All of us belong
equally to the Episcopal Church and to the worldwide Anglican Communion and, most of all, to the universal
Body of Christ. This theological resource honors the centrality of Scripture among Anglicans, interpreted in
concert with the historical traditions of the Church and in the light of reason.
An overview introduces and summarizes questions and major theological themes. Four sections follow the
overview, each expanding on the themes. While readers may engage with this material in a number of ways,
the order of the four sections, which we recommend following, reflects a particular theological approach to
this work. Section one affirms the understanding that everything we do as Christians is meant to express the
Church’s call to participate in God’s own mission in the world. The second section offers theological reflections
on blessing. The third considers blessing same-sex couples within the broader sacramental life of the Church,
especially in light of the theological significance of covenantal relationship. The fourth section reflects on the
challenge of living into our baptismal bond with each other in the midst of disagreements over biblical
interpretation.
In researching and preparing this essay, we discovered and recalled an abundance of resources in Scripture
and the traditions of the Church that have informed our response to Resolution 2009–C056. We now invite
the wider Church to further study and conversation, mindful that the apostle Paul described our shared life in
Christ as one marked by faith, hope, and love, the greatest of these being love (1 Corinthians 13:13).

1

“An Outline of the Faith,  The Book of Common Prayer (New York: Church Hymnal Corporation, 1979), 860. Hereafter this edition of
the Prayer Book is cited as BCP.

Page 6 of 106

Overview: Theological Reflection on Same-Sex Relationships
I give thanks to my God always for you because of the grace of God that has
been given you in Christ Jesus, for in every way you have been enriched in
him, in speech and knowledge of every kind—just as the testimony of Christ
has been strengthened among you—so that you are not lacking in any
spiritual gift as you wait for the revealing of our Lord Jesus Christ.
— 1 Corinthians 1:4–7

In 2009, the General Convention of the Episcopal Church asked for theological and liturgical resources for the
blessing of same-gender relationships (Resolution C056). In response to that call, we invite the Church to
reflect on the theological material collected and developed here for that purpose. In our theological reflection,
we have kept in view more than thirty years of deliberation at General Convention on these matters, especially
Resolution 2000–D039, which identified certain characteristics the Church expects of couples living in
marriage and other lifelong, committed relationships: “fidelity, monogamy, mutual affection and respect,
careful, honest communication, and the holy love which enables those in such relationships to see in each
other the image of God. 2 We understand couples who manifest this manner of life, with God’s grace, to have
entered into a covenant with each other, which presents a rich opportunity for theological reflection.3
The theological themes in this resource, rooted in baptism, eucharist, and the paschal mystery of Christ’s death
and resurrection, offer ways to consider how the Church may appropriately bless lifelong, committed
covenantal relationships of same-sex couples. Such covenantal relationships can reflect God’s own gracious
covenant with us in Christ, manifest the fruits of the Spirit in holiness of life, and model for the whole
community the love of neighbor in the practice of forgiveness and reconciliation.
As the Commission responded to the charge to collect and develop theological resources, we focused our
attention on four areas of consideration. The first is mission: what does the Church believe these blessings will
contribute to God’s own work of redeeming and reconciling love in the world? Second, what does the Church
believe is happening when it pronounces God’s blessing? Third, what does the Church believe are the
distinguishing marks of a holy covenant? And, finally, what is the relationship between Christian unity and our
differing approaches to biblical interpretation regarding same-sex relationships? This overview introduces and
summarizes these areas, and the subsequent sections expand on each of them in turn.

A Focus on Mission
Our starting point is Holy Baptism, which incorporates us into the Body of Christ and commissions us to
participate in God’s mission of reconciliation in the world (2 Corinthians 5:17–19). The purpose of this
reconciling mission is nothing less than the restoration of all people to “unity with God and with each other in
Christ. 4 One of the ways Christians participate in this mission is by witnessing to Christ in how we live in our
closest relationships. “By this everyone will know that you are my disciples,  Jesus said, “if you have love for
one another  (John 13:35).

2

Texts of these resolutions are included in the appendix to these resources. For a fuller discussion of the history of General
Convention resolutions and reports on these issues, see the appendix in To Set Our Hope on Christ: A Response to the Invitation of
Windsor Report ¶135 (New York: The Office of Communication, The Episcopal Church Center, 2005), 63–121.
3 As Paul Marshall points out, the marriage rite of the 1979 Book of Common Prayer uses the language of “covenant  (423). Marshall
notes that covenant-making is a key biblical motif, which makes it useful in our theological reflection on the committed relationships
of all couples (Same-Sex Unions: Stories and Rites [New York: Church Publishing, 2004], 40).
4 “An Outline of the Faith,  BCP, 855.

Page 7 of 106

As Christians, then, our closest relationships are not solely private. The Church has always affirmed the public
and communal dimension of our covenantal relationships. The character of our love, both its fruitfulness and
its failures, affects others around us. The Church, therefore, commissions a couple bound by sacred vows in
Holy Matrimony to participate in God’s mission of reconciliation. Such relationships are set apart for precisely
that divine purpose: to bear witness to and participate in the creating, redeeming, and sustaining love of God.
This missional character of covenantal blessing, reflected in both Scripture and the historical traditions of the
Church, deserves renewed attention today. The 2000 General Convention contributed to this renewal when it
passed Resolution D039, which identified monogamy, fidelity, holy love, and other characteristics of lifelong,
committed relationships. Significantly, that resolution was framed as a way to enable the Church to engage
more effectively in its mission. Many in the Episcopal Church have witnessed these characteristics in the
committed relationships of same-sex couples. That recognition can, and in many places already has,
broadened the understanding of the Church’s mission of participating in God’s reconciling work in the world.

A Theology of Blessing
We understand the celebration and blessing of committed, monogamous, lifelong, faithful same-sex
relationships as part of the Church’s work of offering outward and visible signs of God’s grace among us.
“Blessing  exhibits a multifaceted character, yet the Church has always affirmed that blessing originates in
God, the giver of every good gift. The Church participates in God’s blessing of committed, covenantal couples
in three intertwined aspects: first, we thank God for the grace already discerned in the lives of the couple;
second, we ask God’s continual favor so that the couple may manifest more fully the fruits of the Spirit in their
lives; and third, we seek the empowerment of the Holy Spirit as the Church commissions the couple to bear
witness to the gospel in the world.
This threefold character of blessing, therefore, acknowledges what is already present—God’s goodness. The
Church’s blessing also sets the relationship apart for God’s purposes and prays for the divine grace the couple
will need to fulfill those purposes. Just as the blessing of bread and wine at the eucharist sets them apart from
ordinary usage and designates them for a particular, sacred purpose, so the public affirmation of divine
blessing in a covenantal relationship sets that relationship apart from other types of relationship.
The Church expects the blessing of a covenantal relationship to bear the fruits of divine grace in particular
ways—and always with God’s continual help and favor. This makes the couple accountable to the community
of faith as well as to God and to one another. The community, in turn, is held accountable for encouraging,
supporting, and nurturing a blessed relationship as the couple seeks to grow together in holiness of life.
Through its participation in the blessing of covenantal relationships, the Church is blessed by the goodness of
God, who continues to offer blessings in abundance, regardless of merit or circumstance. As we live more fully
into our call to discern, pronounce, seek, and return blessing wherever it may be found, we find that we
ourselves are blessed with joy.

Covenantal Relationship
Reflecting theologically on same-sex relationships can become an occasion for the Church to reflect more
broadly on the significance of covenantal commitment in the life of faith. Both Scripture and our theological
traditions invite us to consider, first, the sacramental character of covenantal relationships; by this we mean
the potential of such relationships to become outward and visible signs of God’s grace. And second,
covenantal relationships can both reflect and inspire the eschatological vision of Christian life. The covenantal
commitments we make with each other, in other words, can evoke our desire for union with God, which is our
final hope in Christ.

Page 8 of 106

Our understanding of covenant thus derives first and foremost from the gracious covenant God makes with
us in Christ. The many types of relational commitments we make carry the potential to reflect and bear witness
to that divine covenant. Here we have especially in mind the covenants made by intimate couples in the sacred
vows they make to enter into a public, lifelong relationship of faithful monogamy.
Scripture and Christian tradition encourage us to see in these intimate relationships a reflection of God’s own
desire for us. The long tradition of commentary on the biblical Song of Songs, for example, illustrates this
spiritual significance of sexual relationships. Hebrew prophets likewise turned frequently to the metaphor of
marriage to describe God’s commitment to Israel (Isaiah 62:5), an image the Pauline writer also used to
describe the relationship of Christ and the Church (Ephesians 5:21–33).
Covenantal commitments are thus shaped by and can also reflect the paschal mystery of Christ’s death and
resurrection, which the Church celebrates in baptism and eucharist. Intimate couples who live in a sacred
covenant find themselves swept up into a grand and risky endeavor: to see if they can find their life in God by
giving it to another. This dynamic reflects the baptismal life all of us share as Christians. As we live out our
baptismal vows throughout our lives, we are called to follow this pattern of God’s self-giving desire and love.
In the eucharist, we recall Christ’s willingness to give his life for the world: “This is my body, given for you. 
When two people give their lives, their bodies, to one another in a lifelong covenant, they can discover and
show how in giving ourselves we find ourselves (Matthew 16:25). When the Church pronounces God’s blessing
on the vows of lifelong fidelity—for different-sex and same-sex couples alike—the Church makes a bold claim:
the paschal mystery is the very root and source of life in the couple’s relationship.
This sacramental framework in which to reflect on same-sex relationships has, in turn, led us to consider more
carefully several other key theological themes: the vocational aspect of covenantal relationship; how such a
vocation is lived in Christian households; the fruitfulness of covenantal relationships in lives of service,
generosity, and hospitality; and mutual blessing, as God’s blessing in covenantal relationship becomes a
blessing to the wider community.

Christian Unity and Biblical Interpretation
Baptism binds us to God by binding us to one another. Salvation is inherently social and communal. This bond,
furthermore, does not depend on our agreement with one another but instead relies on what God has done
and is doing among us. In fact, our unity in God gives us room to disagree safely, ideally without threat of
breaking our unity, which is God’s own gift. This principle is the very foundation of all covenants, beginning
with the covenant between God and God’s people, exemplified in baptism, reflected in ordained ministry, lived
in vowed religious life and marriage, and encompassing the life of the Church. Our common call as God’s
people is not to find unanimity in all matters of faith and morals, but to go out into all nations as witnesses to
the good news of God in Christ.
Most Christians would, nonetheless, recognize limits to acceptable and legitimate differences. Beyond such
limits, unity becomes untenable. Those limits then pose difficult questions: How far is too far? What kind of
difference would constitute essential disunity? In the debate over same-sex relationships and biblical
interpretation, Episcopalians and other Christians throughout the Anglican Communion have disagreed about
the answers to these questions. Some Episcopalians have concluded that blessing such relationships has gone
too far and, acting on their conscience, have parted company with the Episcopal Church, while others who
disagree have chosen to remain. As a Church, we continue to take different approaches to interpreting
Scripture as we consider same-sex relationships.
We who differ profoundly and yet desire unity more profoundly recall that the Church has held this creative
tension in the past. In Acts 15, we see that Paul differed from the community in Jerusalem over whether
Page 9 of 106

circumcision and the observation of dietary laws should be required of Gentiles in order for them to be
baptized into Christ’s Body. This difference was a matter of biblical interpretation. As Church members held
the tension between their essential unity and their differences in how they understood Scripture, they found
themselves guided by the Holy Spirit.5
Since then, the Church has faced many other similar times of wrestling over differing views of Scripture
concerning a wide range of questions: whether vowed religious life takes priority over marriage, the
prohibition on lending money at interest, polygamous households, divorce and remarriage, contraception, the
institution of slavery, and the role of women in both Church and society, to name just a few. In all these times,
the Church has sought to follow the apostolic process of prayerful deliberation, which respects the centrality
of Scripture and attends carefully to the Spirit’s work among us. This process will not resolve all of our
disagreements, but we continue to trust in the unity that comes not from our own efforts but as God’s gift to
us and for which Christ himself prayed (John 17:11).
————
The following four sections expand on all of these theological themes and considerations, and we offer them
to the wider Church for ongoing, shared discernment as the Body of Christ. No one perspective or community
can fully capture the fullness of the truth into which the Spirit of God continually leads the Church. In this work,
then, as in every other matter of concern for the Church’s life and mission, we take to heart Paul’s reminder
that now “we know only in part  while awaiting that day when “the partial will come to an end  (1 Corinthians
13:9–10). In that spirit of humility, in which no one knows fully, we offer this theological resource on the
blessing of same-sex relationships, trusting that it reflects a shared faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ, inspires
hope for that union with God which Christ has promised, and, above all, expresses that love which shall not
end (1 Corinthians 13:8).

1. The Church’s Call: A Focus on Mission
If anyone is in Christ, there is a new creation: everything old has passed
away; see, everything has become new! All this is from God, who reconciled
us to himself through Christ, and has given us the ministry of reconciliation;
that is, in Christ God was reconciling the world to himself, not counting their
trespasses against them, and entrusting the message of reconciliation to us.
— 2 Corinthians 5:17–19

The meaning and character of blessing play an important role in our shared calling to participate in God’s own
mission of reconciling love in the world. Pronouncing divine blessing takes many forms covering a wide range
of occasions. When the Church gathers to bless the exchanging of sacred vows in a covenantal relationship,
the blessing reflects a threefold action. First, the Church gives thanks for the presence of the Spirit discerned
in the lives of the couple. Second, the Church prays for the divine grace and favor the couple will need to live
into their commitment to each other with love, fidelity, and holiness of life. And third, the Church commissions
the couple to participate in God’s own mission in the world. This missional character of covenantal blessing,
reflected in both Scripture and the historical traditions of the Church, deserves renewed attention today.
While the Church gives thanks for God’s presence and blessing, the public affirmation of the blessing of a

5

This process of discernment over scriptural interpretation guided by the Holy Spirit has shaped every era in Christian history,
including Anglican approaches. See “An Outline of the Faith,  BCP, 853–54.

Page 10 of 106

covenantal relationship also sets that relationship apart for a sacred purpose: to bear witness to the creating,
redeeming, and sustaining love of God.
God’s promise to Abraham sets the tone for this missional understanding of blessing: “I will bless you, and
make your name great, so that you will be a blessing  (Genesis 12:2b). Through Moses, God’s promise extends
to the divine covenant with Israel, a people God chooses to receive divine gifts of protection, guidance, and
fruitfulness. In this covenantal relationship, God makes the people of Israel the stewards of these gifts, not
for their sake only, but to become a blessing for the world. As God declared to Jacob: “All the families of the
earth shall be blessed in you and in your offspring  (Genesis 28:14b). And as God also declared through Isaiah:
“It is too light a thing that you should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob and to restore the survivors
of Israel; I will give you as a light to the nations, that my salvation may reach to the end of the earth  (Isaiah
49:6).
The earliest Christians likewise adopted this missional understanding of covenantal blessing as they
recognized that the grace they received in Christ was not for themselves alone but so that they could bear
witness to that grace “in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth  (Acts 1:8). Jesus
urged this view of the life of faith by reminding his listeners that “no one after lighting a lamp puts it under
the bushel basket, but on the lampstand, and it gives light to all in the house  (Matthew 5:15). In John’s Gospel,
Jesus models this divine mission by washing his disciples’ feet. This act of intimate service provided the
example his disciples were to follow in blessing others with the same life of service (John 13:14–15); the love
God shows for us in Christ, in other words, becomes a blessing for mission and ministry. The covenant of grace
God has made with us in Christ thus calls all of us to that life of service: “Like good stewards of the manifold
grace of God, serve one another with whatever gift each of you has received  (1 Peter 4:10).

Worship and Mission: An Eschatological Vision
Whenever the people of God gather for worship, we return to this foundational view in Scripture: God
continues to bless us through our covenantal relationship with Christ, and this blessing enables and empowers
us to provide a blessing to others. In all of the Church’s rites, from the Daily Office to the Holy Eucharist, we
give thanks for God’s blessings, and we pray for the grace we need to manifest that blessing in the world, to
“do the work [God has] given us to do. 6 This pattern appears in the marriage rite as well, which celebrates
God’s blessing on loving commitment, not for the sake of the couple alone, but for the world, which stands in
need of such witness to love and faithfulness. In that rite, the assembly prays for the couple, that God will
“make their life together a sign of Christ’s love to this sinful and broken world, that unity may overcome
estrangement, forgiveness heal guilt, and joy conquer despair. 7 God’s covenantal blessing empowers the
couple as missionaries of grace.
Moreover, the Church blesses and sends in order to lay claim to our part in the fulfillment of salvation history;
we collaborate with God as both proclaimers of and instruments for the new creation God is bringing about.
“The redemption of the world is not finished, and so human history is not finished. History is going
somewhere, and it is not there yet,  one theologian reminds us. “The church exists to be the thing that God is
doing, and to become the thing that God will be doing until the End.  What God has done and will continue to
do in the life of the Church manifests “not just the inherent goodness of creation but the possibility of new
creation, of healing and justice and forgiveness.  And so the Church blesses in order to fulfill its
“‘eschatological’ project of becoming the kingdom. 8

6

Postcommunion Prayer, BCP, 366.
BCP, 429.
8 Charles Hefling, “What Do We Bless and Why?  Anglican Theological Review 85:1 (Winter 2003): 91–93.
7

Page 11 of 106

This eschatological vision of the Church’s life of worship and mission carries the potential to deepen our shared
reflection on the meaning of blessing itself. In blessing and being blessed, we join in the great work of
redemption that God has always been doing, is doing now, and will do until the End. Indeed, this expansive
view of blessing, rooted deeply in the covenant God has made with us in Christ, led Paul to declare that God’s
own mission of reconciliation has been entrusted to all those who have been blessed by this promise of a new
creation (2 Corinthians 5:17–19).

Same-Sex Relationships and the Church’s Mission
In responding to the call to participate in God’s mission in the world, the Church must attend carefully to the
particular cultural circumstances in which it proclaims the hope of the gospel. Over the last sixty years in the
United States (among other places), social, psychological, and biomedical sciences have contributed to a
gradual shift in cultural perspectives on the complexity of sexual orientation and gender identity. The
American Psychiatric Association, for example, no longer considers homosexuality to be a pathological
condition,9 which it did in the mid-twentieth century. Gay and lesbian people now participate openly in nearly
every profession and aspect of life. Many openly form stable and enduring relationships and some also raise
children in their families. Many churches, including the Episcopal Church, have also discerned in same-sex
relationships the same possibility of holiness of life and the fruits of the Spirit that we pray for in those who
seek the commitment of marriage and its blessings.10
This cultural shift concerning human sexuality bears on the Church’s pastoral care and also on its mission. The
2000 General Convention, for example, identified certain characteristics that the Church expects of all couples
in lifelong, committed relationships: “fidelity, monogamy, mutual affection and respect, careful, honest
communication, and the holy love that enables those in such relationships to see in each other the image of
God. 11 Significantly, the Convention framed that resolution as a matter of mission. Witnessing the Spirit at
work in same-sex relationships, just as we do in different-sex relationships, can and in many places already has
broadened the Church’s understanding of how it participates in God’s own reconciling work in the world.
Many gay and lesbian people (among others) who see same-sex couples exchange vows and receive a blessing
are moved, likewise, to seek the Church’s support for deepening their own commitments and faithfulness.
They, in turn, offer their gifts for ministry to the wider community, gifts that contribute to the Church’s mission
to “restore all people to unity with God and each other in Christ. 12 When the Church pronounces God’s
blessing on same-sex couples who are also raising children, those children can understand better the sanctity
of their own family, and the family itself can receive the same support and encouragement from the Church
that different-sex couples receive for their families. The blessing of same-sex relationships in the community
of faith can also become an occasion for reconciliation among estranged family members, including those who
have not understood or have even rejected their lesbian and gay relatives.
Heterosexual people may also find their own vocations and ministries strengthened and empowered in those
moments of blessing, as they may do at the celebration of a marriage, or at the public profession of
9

“All major professional mental health organizations have gone on record to affirm that homosexuality is not a mental disorder. In
1973, the American Psychiatric Association removed homosexuality from its official diagnostic manual, the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM).  From “Let’s Talk Facts about Sexual Orientation,  produced by the American Psychiatric
Association, http://www.healthyminds.org/Document-Library/Brochure-Library/Lets-Talk-Facts-Sexual-Orientation.aspx?FT=.pdf.
10 To Set Our Hope on Christ, 24–25. For a broader overview and analysis, see the collection of essays edited by Walter Wink,
Homosexuality and Christian Faith: Questions of Conscience for the Churches (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1999).
11 General Convention Resolution 2000–D039. Scripture reflects a similar approach to discerning evidence of divine grace and the
Spirit’s work when, for example, Jesus uses the analogy of assessing the goodness of a tree based on the kind of fruit it bears
(Matthew 7:16–18 and Luke 6:43).
12 “An Outline of the Faith,  BCP, 855.

Page 12 of 106

commitment to a particular ministry or community. In other words, the gifts lesbians and gay men discern in
their own lives and committed relationships are not just for themselves alone. One Episcopal priest has
observed, “Over and over again, we see lesbians and gay men, people who would have been hiding in the
shadows of our church a generation ago, now coming forward to contribute their gifts, their strength and
loyalty and wisdom, freely and openly to the whole community of faith. And heterosexual people who have
seen this happening have also been freed to give more generously of themselves.  13
Friends of same-sex couples and many others in the general public also take note of these moments of
blessing, encountering the expansive and generous reach of gospel welcome. As friends witness the grace of
these covenantal commitments, and the generosity of the Church’s embrace, many of them will be drawn to
the community of faith, perhaps for the first time or after having left. Such has already been the case in many
congregations and dioceses in the Episcopal Church.

The Challenge of God’s Blessing for Mission
Scripture attests to significant moments in which biblical writers challenged their communities to expand their
vision of God’s saving work in the world or in which the writers were themselves challenged by that divine
word to see past their present horizons. The ancient Israelites, for example, had to struggle with how far the
blessing of their covenantal life would reach. Isaiah urged them to see all the nations—not just their own—
streaming to God’s holy mountain (Isaiah 2:1–4). The early Church was no exception to this struggle.
In the Acts of the Apostles, we read about Peter’s hesitation to cross traditional boundaries between the clean
and the unclean in his encounter with Cornelius, a Roman centurion (Acts 10). In a vision, Peter heard God
urging him to eat certain unclean animals in direct disobedience to the injunctions found in Leviticus 11. This
vision led Peter to consider anew whether God’s saving work and blessing might be found in places and among
particular people he had not before considered possible. When challenged about this expansive vision, Peter
declared, “God has shown me that I should not call anyone profane or unclean  (Acts 10:28). To those who
were startled and perhaps scandalized by the extension of the gospel to Gentiles, Peter asked, “Can anyone
withhold the water for baptizing these people who have received the Holy Spirit just as we have?  (Acts
10:47).14
Time after time in the history of Israel and in the early Church, responding to the challenge of God’s
extravagant grace and the richness of divine blessing has expanded the mission of God’s people in the world,
even beyond where many had previously imagined. The loving faithfulness and covenantal commitment of
lesbian and gay couples presents a similar challenge to the Church today. Many throughout the Episcopal
Church and other Christian communions have recognized and discerned the Spirit’s presence and work in
these same-sex relationships, and are asking God’s people to ponder why we would withhold a public
affirmation and declaration of blessing from those who have received the Holy Spirit just as others have. More
importantly, however, this moment in the Episcopal Church’s life calls all of us to consider anew the rich
blessings we receive by God’s grace in Christ and through the Holy Spirit. These blessings, in turn, animate the
ministry of reconciliation that God has given us as ambassadors of the new creation that is unfolding, even
now, in our midst.

13

L. William Countryman, “The Big House of Classic Anglicanism,  from a speech given at the Claiming the Blessing Conference in St.
Louis, Missouri, in November 2002 and quoted in Claiming the Blessing, the theology statement of the Claiming the Blessing coalition,
page 11; http://www.claimingtheblessing.org/files/pdf/CTBTheology_Final_.pdf.
14 Paul describes his confrontation with Peter about these very issues in Galatians 2:1–21.

Page 13 of 106

2. The Church’s Joy: A Theology of Blessing
Whoever invokes a blessing in the land shall bless by the God of faithfulness.
— Isaiah 65:16
The disciples were continually in the temple blessing God.
— Luke 24:53

“Blessed are you, Lord God, ruler of the universe, who created everything for your glory!  This classic blessing
in Jewish tradition sets the tone for any theological reflection on what it means to bless and to receive a
blessing. Rather than ourselves, other people, animals, places, or things, God’s people first and foremost bless
God, the giver of life and creator of all. Discerning and giving thanks for the countless reasons that we can and
should bless God are, therefore, at the heart of the Church’s work in the world. Indeed, at the heart of Christian
worship is the eucharist, or “thanksgiving,  in which we lift up the “cup of blessing  (1 Corinthians 10:16).
In Anglican contexts, the Church’s work in the world is shaped by common prayer and worship. In addition to
reading the Scriptures and prayerful meditation, Anglicans have always relied on our shared liturgical life for
discerning where God is present and how God is calling us to live in the world as witnesses to the gospel of
Jesus Christ in the power of the Holy Spirit. While God is active always and everywhere, the community of faith
gathers to discern God’s activity and make it ever more visible.
Although ordained ministers are called to the Church’s work in a particular way, they share the work with the
whole community of the baptized. In their sacramental vocation, ordained ministers lead the community in
offering outward and visible signs of the inward and spiritual grace that is present among God’s people. Clergy
do not, in other words, “create grace  where there was none to be found already; rather, the whole Body of
Christ, in many and various ways, proclaims God’s gracious activity in our midst. This proclamation offers the
assurance of God’s grace promised to us in Christ Jesus and offers support as we strive to manifest the fruits
of the Spirit in our daily lives.
Many in the Episcopal Church and other Christian communions believe that the celebration and blessing of the
covenantal commitment of a same-sex couple also belongs in the Church’s work of offering outward and
visible signs of God’s grace. While “blessing  exhibits a multifaceted meaning, it always originates in God,
which the Church rightly and daily acknowledges: “We bless you for our creation, preservation, and all the
blessings of this life; but above all for your immeasurable love in the redemption of the world by our Lord
Jesus Christ; for the means of grace, and for the hope of glory. 15
The Church participates in this fundamental, divine blessing in three related ways: thanking God for God’s
goodness and favor; seeking God’s continued favor and grace so that we may manifest more fully that
gratitude in our lives; and receiving power from the Holy Spirit to bear witness to that grace in the world. This
threefold character of blessing acknowledges what is already present, God’s grace, but it does something
more as well: it establishes a new reality. Bread and wine, for example, when blessed at the eucharistic table,
are set apart from their ordinary use and designated for a particular, sacred purpose. Similarly, the public
affirmation of divine blessing in a covenantal relationship sets that relationship apart from other types. God’s
people expect such a blessing to bear the fruits of God’s grace in particular ways, making a couple in such a
blessed covenant accountable to the community of faith, as well as to God and to each other. The community,
in turn, is held accountable for encouraging, supporting, and nurturing a blessed relationship as the couple
seeks to grow together in holiness of life.

15

“The General Thanksgiving,  BCP, 125.

Page 14 of 106

In short, the grace and blessing of God already discerned in a couple’s relationship does not thereby render a
liturgical rite of blessing redundant. To the contrary, the Church’s blessing performs what it declares, thus
changing the couple and the Church. The couple becomes more fully aware of God’s favor and also receives a
particular role, as a couple, in the Church’s mission in the world; the Church is likewise changed, as holiness of
life is made more visible and as it receives and accepts its commission to support the couple in their life and
ministry.
Scripture guides us in this understanding of blessing by placing it in relation to both creation and covenant. In
Genesis, God declares the whole creation good, a source of blessing for which we thank God, the giver of every
good gift. This blessing is manifested in more particular ways in the covenant God makes with Noah and, by
extension, the whole of the creation (Genesis 9:8–16), with Abraham (Genesis 12:2–3), and, through Moses,
with the people of Israel (Deuteronomy 7:12–14). Likewise, the New Testament reflects God’s blessing on all
creation, as the Word of God becomes flesh in Jesus; it reflects the blessing of covenant as well, as the life,
death, and resurrection of Jesus reconcile us with God and assure us of God’s loving faithfulness toward us
and the whole creation. In his final meal with his disciples, Jesus blessed God for the bread and cup as signs of
the new covenant (Matthew 26:26–29). The blessing we receive by participating in that meal at the eucharistic
table strengthens us to live out in all of our relationships the forgiveness and reconciliation to which that meal
calls us.
Scripture bears witness to the relational character of blessing: being in relationship with God is not only a
blessing for us, but becomes a blessing to others as well. God’s covenant with Israel becomes a blessing not
for Israel alone but for “all the nations.  This is the very promise made to Abraham: “in you all the families of
the earth shall be blessed  (Genesis 12:3b). The extent of this divine blessing unfolded in Israel’s self-awareness
over time and in various ways. “All the nations  referred, of course, to Gentiles, the very ones many in Israel
had not expected to share in God’s promises. God’s blessing thus expands the reach of welcome and
hospitality not only to the near and familiar neighbor, but also to the distant stranger, who is made neighbor
because of God’s own generosity. As Paul noted, through faith “in Christ Jesus the blessing of Abraham might
come to the Gentiles, so that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith  (Galatians 3:14). The
blessing of God’s covenant with us in Christ empowers us, through the Spirit, to offer such expansive and
generous blessing to the world, in thought, word, and deed. God’s blessings inspire us in countless ways to
live as emissaries of divine blessing in all that we do—in our work, our play, and our relationships. In all of this,
God’s goodness in our lives becomes a blessing to others, to neighbors both near and far.
As Christians, baptism and eucharist focus our attention on the particular blessings of the paschal mystery of
Christ’s death and resurrection. Those blessings, in turn, encourage us to discern the many other ways God’s
blessing is manifested in both creation and covenant. The goodness of God makes everything in creation a
potential vehicle for blessing, including the love and faithfulness of covenantal relationship, in which we
experience our call to manifest divine goodness. Thus, the Church is continually discerning where the
goodness of God, the grace of Christ, and the gifts of the Holy Spirit are urging the Church to manifest God’s
blessing for others and, in response, to bless God with hearts and lives marked by gratitude and praise.
Another aspect of the biblical witness deserves attention as well: the emphasis on abundance. In the midst of
desert wanderings, Moses struck a rock and “water came out abundantly  for the people of Israel (Numbers
20:11). “Like the vine,  we read in Ecclesiasticus, “I bud forth delights, and my blossoms become glorious and
abundant fruit  (Ecclesiasticus 24:17). “You prepare a table before me,  declares the psalmist, and “my cup
overflows  (Psalm 23:5). “Give,  Jesus says, “and it will be given to you. A good measure, pressed down,
shaken together, running over, will be put into your lap  (Luke 6:38). And to the Christians in Corinth, Paul
declares, “God is able to provide you with every blessing in abundance, so that by always having enough of
everything, you may share abundantly in every good work  (2 Corinthians 9:8). Scripture invites us, in other
words, to see the blessing of God’s goodness, not as a scarce commodity either to hoard or to protect, but
Page 15 of 106

rather as an unending font of deathless love and perpetual grace—a veritable embarrassment of divine riches.
In sacred covenantal relationship, God’s abundance is exhibited in many ways, including the companionship,
friendship, and mutual joy of intimacy. By affirming and publicly acknowledging that blessing of abundance
already present in vibrant covenantal relationships, including same-sex relationships, the Church expects
those relationships to manifest the grace of God, the gifts of the Spirit, and holiness of life.
Jesus’ iconic parable about the prodigal son adds a further layer to this biblical witness to God’s abundant love
and grace. In this story, God pours out the abundance of divine blessing on all, regardless of merit or
circumstance. When the prodigal son decides at last to return to his father’s house, hoping to be granted, at
best, the status of a slave, his father rushes to meet him and welcome him home, and even prepares a lavish
feast in his honor. “While he was still far off,  Jesus says, and thus well before the son could speak any words
of repentance, “his father saw him and was filled with compassion; he ran and put his arms around him and
kissed him  (Luke 15:20). In our lives, as in the parable, God showers us with blessings so that we may receive
life abundantly, even though we have in no way earned these blessings.
This parable suggests that the abundance of this household is more than sufficient to open outward to receive
the younger son. The abundance of this household is even more than sufficient for the resentful elder son,
who begrudges such celebration for his wayward brother. The household brims with abundance, if only the
elder son would open his heart to receive it (Luke 15:29–31). Both sons in Jesus’ parable stand as potent
reminders that the blessing of divine goodness does not automatically transform lives: we must be willing to
receive such blessing. And yet even when we are not willing, God will continue to offer blessings in abundance.
The teachings of Jesus return to this theme repeatedly, as in the parables of the sower (Mark 4:3–8) and the
wedding banquet (Matthew 22:1–10), as well as the feeding of more than five thousand with just five loaves
of bread and two fish (Luke 9:12–17).
The Church’s participation in divine blessing can help each of us in various ways to be open to God’s abundant
goodness. The Church’s liturgical life, that is, our practice of common prayer and worship, can create space
for God’s people to open their hearts and minds to receiving the blessing God offers. For those in a covenantal
relationship, that intentional space (for both hearing the word of blessing in their lives and blessing God in
return) marks a significant, even an essential deepening and strengthening of their lives with each other, with
their community, and with God. In blessing covenantal relationships, just as in the eucharist, we give thanks
for God’s abundant goodness and pray for the continued presence of the Spirit to empower us to do the work
God has given us to do in the world. The blessing of the eucharistic table sets us apart as the Body of Christ in
the world, called and empowered to proclaim the gospel, just as the blessing of a covenantal relationship sets
that relationship apart as “a sign of Christ’s love to this sinful and broken world, that unity may overcome
estrangement, forgiveness heal guilt, and joy conquer despair. 16
Discerning, pronouncing, seeking, and returning blessing describe well the Church’s work. Even more, it is the
Church’s joy. Paul urged the Christians in Rome to “rejoice with those who rejoice, weep with those who
weep  (Romans 12:15). The early Christians gave themselves to such rejoicing, as they were “continually in the
temple blessing God  in their celebration of Christ’s victory over death (Luke 24:53). Whenever and wherever
the Church discerns particular instances of God’s abundant goodness, the Church rightly thanks God for such
a gift. We also ask God for the grace to live into that gift more fully, as we joyfully bear witness to that blessing
in the world.

16

The Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage, BCP, 429.

Page 16 of 106

3. The Church’s Life: Covenantal Relationship
Do you not know that all of us who have been baptized into Christ Jesus
were baptized into his death? Therefore we have been buried with him
by baptism into death, so that, just as Christ was raised from the dead
by the glory of the Father, so we too might walk in newness of life.
— Romans 6:3–4

Creation, Baptism, and Eucharist
Covenants have taken many different forms across time and in diverse cultural contexts. Both Scripture and
Christian history exhibit that diversity as well. The most familiar covenantal relationship is marriage, to which
both the Hebrew prophets and New Testament writers turned as a way to describe God’s desire and
commitment to be in relationship with us (Isaiah 62:5, Ephesians 5:21–33). Marriage itself has exhibited a
variety of forms over the centuries yet still provides a pattern for a number of significant covenantal
relationships, such as the vowed religious life or ordained ministry.
In 2000, General Convention identified certain characteristics that the Church expects to see in lifelong,
committed relationships: “fidelity, monogamy, mutual affection and respect, careful, honest communication,
and the holy love which enables those in such relationships to see in each other the image of God  (Resolution
D039). These characteristics describe well what we mean by “covenant  as we have reflected theologically on
same-sex relationships. A couple enacts their decision to enter into a lifelong commitment of fidelity and
accountability in the context of God’s household, the Church, by exchanging vows, and the Church responds
by pronouncing God’s blessing. Covenantal relationship then carries the potential to reflect for the Church the
gracious covenant God has made with us in the paschal mystery of Christ’s death and resurrection, which the
Church celebrates in baptism and eucharist.
Some will find this kind of theological reflection on same-sex relationships unfamiliar and perhaps
unwarranted. Many different-sex couples would likewise find this to be a new way of thinking about their own
marital vows. Thus, General Convention Resolution 2009–C056, which called for these theological resources,
becomes an opportunity for reflecting more broadly on the role of covenantal relationship in the life of the
Church. In doing so, the blessing of same-sex relationships can then be understood within the broader
framework of the Church’s sacramental life and its mission in the world.
The framework for covenantal relationship begins with God’s own declaration of the goodness of creation
(Genesis 1:31). That goodness inspires us to give thanks to God, the creator of all things. The heavens declare
God’s glory, the psalmist reminds us, and the earth proclaims God’s handiwork (Psalm 19:1). Thus, even in
creation’s fragility, limitation, and affliction, the biblical writers discerned signs of God’s providential power,
sustaining love, and saving grace. The Church celebrates God’s goodness in worship and with sacramental
signs of God’s blessing. These “outward and visible signs of inward and spiritual grace  manifest God’s
transforming presence and so are “sure and certain means by which we receive that grace. 17 Chief among
these signs are baptism and eucharist, which derive directly from the life and ministry of Jesus Christ.
Reconciliation, confirmation, marriage, ordination, and unction also manifest the grace of God at key moments
in Christian life, each in its own way, yet these are by no means the only occasions that do so.18 As disciples of
Jesus, the incarnate Word of God, we are called to make God’s creating, redeeming, and sustaining love known

17
18

“An Outline of the Faith,  BCP, 857.
“An Outline of the Faith,  BCP, 857–58, 861.

Page 17 of 106

in all things, in all circumstances, and throughout our daily lives and relationships. The sacramental life of the
Church focuses that calling in particular ways.
Baptism and eucharist recapitulate the arc of salvation history in creation, sin, judgment, repentance, and
redemption, or the fulfillment of the whole creation in the presence of God.19 In baptism, we are incorporated
into the paschal mystery of Christ’s death and resurrection, and we are empowered by the Holy Spirit to live
more fully into the holiness of life to which God calls all of us. This sacramental act manifests the eternal
covenant God has made with us, declaring that we are God’s own beloved, inheritors of God’s promises, and
God’s friends;20 we are sealed by God’s own Spirit and marked as Christ’s own forever. 21 This sign of God’s
covenant is irrevocable, not relying on our adherence to the covenant but rather on the grace and goodness
of God in Christ Jesus. As members of the Body of Christ, we commit ourselves to live in the manner of life
appropriate to the body to which we belong. This manner of life is summed up in the two great
commandments: to love God with our whole being and to love our neighbors as ourselves.22 Even though we
inevitably fall far short of this commitment, God’s steadfast love maintains the covenant God has made, and
God both seeks and graciously enables our return to fidelity.
In the Episcopal Church, the significance of baptism for Christian faith and life became even clearer with the
ratification of the 1979 Book of Common Prayer. The Baptismal Covenant shapes the rite of Holy Baptism by
beginning with an affirmation of faith (the Apostles’ Creed), followed by five distinct promises made by (or on
behalf of) those being baptized: to continue in the apostles’ teaching and fellowship; to persevere in resisting
evil; to proclaim the Good News of God in Christ; to seek and serve Christ in all persons; and to strive for justice
and peace, respecting the dignity of all persons.23 The rite begins, in other words, with God’s own Trinitarian
mission of creating, redeeming, and sustaining love in the world. The promises we make are in response to
that divine mission and constitute our vowed commitment to participate in that mission—and always “with
God’s help.  This approach to baptismal theology continues to guide and inform our prayerful discernment as
Episcopalians, which is rooted first and foremost in the covenant God makes with us through the Word of God
made flesh (John 1:14).24
In the redemptive work of the Incarnation, God draws the whole creation back into union with God, lifting it
up through the resurrection and ascension of Christ toward its perfection, when God will be all in all (1
Corinthians 15:28). In the eucharist we celebrate this transformative action, accomplished through Christ’s
self-giving of his own Body and Blood, which nourishes our bodies and souls, equipping us to participate in
God’s own mission of reconciliation in the world.
In the eucharist, our fragmented lives are gathered together into one offering to God, the giver of all good
things. As a community gathered in prayer, we reaffirm our participation in God’s covenant as we hear God’s
holy word, confess and receive forgiveness of our sins, and join with the whole company of saints in prayer
for the Church and the world. God receives the gifts we bring, limited and flawed as they may be, blesses them,
and then returns them to us as bread from heaven. As we are nourished by the Body and Blood of Christ, we
are formed ever deeper in holiness of life, conforming to the likeness of Christ. At the table, we are given a
foretaste of the heavenly banquet in which all are gathered to God, a foretaste that clarifies and strengthens

19

See “Thanksgiving over the Water,  BCP, 306–307; Romans 8:18–25; and 1 Corinthians 15:28.
“I do not call you servants any longer, … but I have called you friends  (John 15:15). See also Gregory of Nyssa, who understood
our incorporation into the Body of Christ to make us God’s own “friends  (Orat. in 1 Cor. xv.28 ).
21 Holy Baptism, BCP, 308.
22 See Deuteronomy 6:5, Leviticus 19:18, and Matthew 22:37–40.
23 BCP, 304–305.
24 See Louis Weil, A Theology of Worship, The New Church’s Teaching Series, vol. 12 (Cambridge, MA: Cowley Publications, 2002),
11–22.
20

Page 18 of 106

our longing to witness to God’s love. As we are blessed and sent out, we are empowered by the Holy Spirit to
participate in God’s work of bringing all things to that sanctification and fullness for which God created them.
Moreover, as we celebrate eucharist together, we recall all the other tables that we gather around in our
various households and come to see them as places where Christ is present. This eucharistic pattern—often
described with the actions take, bless, break, and give—shapes all the relationships that we bring into our
baptismal life with God. We take these relationships, bless God for their goodness, ask God to bless them and
break them open further to divine grace, so that we may give them to the world as witnesses to the gospel of
Jesus Christ.
Baptism and eucharist, as sacraments of God’s covenant of creating, redeeming, and sustaining love, shape
our lives as Christians in relation to God and to God’s creation; this calls us to live with love, compassion, justice,
and peace toward all creatures, friend or foe, neighbor or stranger. We are not only called to live in this way
but also strengthened to do so by our participation in these sacramental acts. The sacramental life of the
Church strengthens us to give ourselves and to receive others as we contribute to the coming of God’s realm
“on earth as it is in heaven  (Matthew 6:10) and proclaim Christ until he comes again (1 Corinthians 11:26).
Through baptism and eucharist we are brought into and sustained in all these many and various relationships.
First and foremost among them is our relationship with the God who creates, redeems, and sustains us. We
also participate in countless other relationships with the many diverse people, communities, and institutions
that we encounter throughout the world. All of these relationships call us to bear witness to the gospel
precisely because our lives as creatures of God are constituted in relation; we are created in the Trinitarian
image of God, an image that is inherently relational and rooted and grounded in love.25
Accordingly, same-sex relationships belong in that extensive network of relations in which we are called to
bear witness to the gospel. In the next section, we consider the blessing of same-sex relationships in that
broader context, beginning with the fundamental call all of us share to love our neighbors as ourselves. Since
God calls us into particular forms of loving commitments with others, we turn in the following sections to
three interrelated aspects of that calling: covenant-making, intentional Christian households, and faithful
intimacy.

Loving Our Neighbors as Ourselves
Christians strive to model all of our relationships on the love, grace, and compassion of Christ, loving our
neighbors, both near and distant, as we love ourselves. Loving others is possible only because of the grace of
God, who first loved us (1 John 4:19). Baptism and eucharist continually send us out to all our neighbors, where
we learn again and again the blessing of offering ourselves and receiving others in gospel hospitality.
Hospitality means more than good manners. Scripture regards hospitality toward both friend and stranger as
evidence of covenantal obedience and fruitfulness. 26 The story of Sodom’s destruction in Genesis 19, a
particularly dramatic biblical reminder of the importance of hospitable relations, has been frequently cited by
opponents of blessing same-sex relationships. However, such interpretations of this passage rely less on the
biblical story itself than on the cultural reception of this story over many centuries of European history. 27

25

“An Outline of the Faith,  BCP, 845.
See Exodus 22:21, Leviticus 19:34, Deuteronomy 24:19–21, Malachi 3:5, and Hebrews 13:2, among many others. For an overview and
analysis of the centrality of hospitality in Scripture and in early Christianity, see Amos Yong, Hospitality and the Other: Pentecost,
Christian Practices, and the Neighbor (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 2008).
27 The term “sodomy,  for example, does not appear in Scripture, and what it has come to mean (including within North Atlantic
jurisprudence) is not supported by the biblical references to it. See Jay Emerson Johnson, “Sodomy and Gendered Love: Reading
Genesis 19 in the Anglican Communion,  in The Oxford Handbook of the Reception History of the Bible, ed. Michael Lieb, Emma Mason,
26

Page 19 of 106

The narrative in this passage turns on whether certain visitors to Sodom will be received graciously and
hospitably by the city’s inhabitants or instead will be exploited and even raped. The sin of Sodom’s citizens
thus refers explicitly to the codes of hospitality in the ancient Near East rather than to same-sex sexual
relations.28 Other biblical writers who refer to Sodom never highlight sexuality—or mention it at all. Ezekiel’s
interpretation, for example, is quite direct: “This was the guilt of your sister Sodom: she and her daughters
had pride, excess of food, and prosperous ease, but did not aid the poor and needy  (Ezekiel 16:49).29 Jesus
evokes the story of Sodom not to teach about sexual ethics but in the context of sending out his disciples to
minister. Those who do not receive his disciples, he promises, will suffer a fate worse than the citizens of
Sodom (Matthew 10:15). The threat underscores the centrality of hospitality in that ancient story.30
As early as the 1950s, biblical scholars attempted to place Genesis 19 in its original cultural context and to
revive an interpretive approach to that story that resonated with the intrabiblical witness to it.31 In this
interpretation, Genesis 19 applies to all people rather than only to some, and the lesson for all is the primacy
of hospitality, or the love of neighbor, as Jesus himself commanded. 32 We manifest this love of neighbor in
countless ways, each instance shaped by the particular individual or community we encounter, whether in our
own family, or with coworkers, or strangers.
Relationships, in other words, take many different forms. At times, we choose particular relationships based
on our own preferences, needs, or desires; at other times, we are in relationships without a lot of choice, as
with colleagues at work or fellow travelers. No matter which, the “neighbor  offers us an occasion for
manifesting the love of God in Christ. The gospels proclaim not only the self-giving love Jesus showed to the
disciples he chose, but also the love Jesus urged for the stranger encountered by chance, as in the parable of
the good Samaritan (Luke 10:29–37). Christ sets the example for us to follow in all of our many and varied
relationships, a model that respects the dignity of every person and that encourages giving oneself for the
good of the other.33 Relationships are “schools for virtue  and formation, that is, opportunities for us to form
dispositions and habits that manifest Christ-like love.
As people joined with God and to each other by baptism and eucharist, we are called to embody in all of our
relationships—those we may consider personal or private and those we consider corporate or public—a love
that is both self-giving and other-receiving. As we endeavor to respond to this calling, we depend on God’s
and Jonathan Roberts (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 413–34; and Michael Carden, Sodomy: A History of a Christian Biblical
Myth (London: Equinox Publishing, 2004).
28 The definition of “sodomy  varied widely throughout Christian history and coalesced exclusively around a particular sexual act
between men only in the eleventh century; see Mark D. Jordan, The Invention of Sodomy in Christian Theology (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1997).
29 Ezekiel’s description represents the approach most often taken by writers in the Hebrew Bible, in which the sin of Sodom is always
associated with violence or injustice; see Robin Scroggs, The New Testament and Homosexuality: Contextual Background for
Contemporary Debate (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1983). In the New Testament, Jude 7 is sometimes cited as well, yet that verse
does not describe “sexual immorality  precisely (it could refer to rape, for example); the “unnatural lust  of Sodom’s inhabitants
could also mean that the strangers sent to Sodom were actually angels (see Genesis 6:4).
30 Patristic writers viewed hospitality as central. See, for example, Origen, Homilia V in Genesim (PG 12:188–89): “Hear this, you who
close your homes to guests! Hear this, you who shun the traveler as an enemy! Lot lived among the Sodomites. We do not read of
any other good deeds of his … [save] he opened his home to guests ; Ambrose of Milan, De Abrahamo 1:6:52 (PL 14:440): Lot
“placed the hospitality of his house—sacred even among a barbarous people—above the modesty [of his daughters].  Cited by John
Boswell, Christianity, Tolerance, and Homosexuality: Gay People in Western Europe from the Beginning of the Christian Era to the
Fourteenth Century (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980), 98.
31 One of the earliest examples of this approach was Derrick Sherwin Bailey, Homosexuality and the Western Christian Tradition
(London: Longmans, Green, 1955).
32 Some biblical scholars continue to interpret the story as a condemnation of homosexual behavior. See, for example, Robert A. J.
Gagnon, The Bible and Homosexual Practice: Texts and Hermeneutics (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 2001), 71–91.
33 “The Baptismal Covenant,  BCP, 305.

Page 20 of 106

grace as we are gradually brought by the Spirit into that union with God for which Christ himself prayed (John
17:11). We also serve as living proclamations of God’s creative, redeeming, and sustaining love for the world.
Given our limitations, that witness is inevitably imperfect and sometimes ambiguous, yet we continue to trust
that all things are working together for good (Romans 8:28) as we shape our lives and relationships to the
pattern of God’s own love for us and for the world. That pattern may then lead into particular forms of
commitment in which we discern a call to covenantal relationship.

Called into Covenant
Some loving relationships with our neighbors exhibit a particular depth of commitment, which can lead to an
intentional covenant with another person or with a community. Scripture bears witness to the significance of
covenant-making in many ways but especially as an expression of God’s blessing, such as the covenant God
makes with the whole of creation through Noah (Genesis 9:9–13) and with the people of Israel through
Abraham (Genesis 12:2–3). Christians celebrate the covenant that Jesus proclaimed and enacted at the final
meal he shared with his disciples (Luke 22:20) and which we mark with the “cup of blessing  (1 Corinthians
10:16) at the eucharistic table.
Scripture invites us, in other words, to see our covenantal commitments with each other as particular
expressions of the love of both God and neighbor as well as expressions of God’s blessing. As we commit
ourselves to the good of the other, we offer that commitment as a witness to God’s covenantal love for the
world. We discover God’s blessing in these covenantal commitments as we are able, more and more, to
manifest consistent regard and respect for the other, even as we struggle with our own limitations and flaws.
We discover God’s blessing even further as we realize, in ever newer ways, how a covenantal relationship can
enhance and contribute to the well-being of others, of neighbors, strangers, the Church, and the world.
People who enter a covenant promise each other, a community, and God that their shared future will take a
particular shape, one for which they intend to be held accountable, not only by their covenant partners but
also by the wider community.34 While the Canons of the Episcopal Church describe marriage as a union of a
man and a woman, the patterns of marriage can help us understand other kinds of covenantal relationship,
such as vowed religious life and the commitments of same-sex couples. In all of these covenantal relationships,
the partners promise to be trustworthy, to remain faithful to one another despite other demands on their
time and energy or possibilities for engagement with others. The partners promise to accompany and assist
each other in faithfulness; they pledge their support for the well-being of the other. These relationships are
directed toward vitality and fruitfulness as they contribute to human flourishing, within and beyond the
relationship. The depth of this covenantal commitment means it is a vocation, a life of faithfulness to which
some are called by God and which God blesses, so that, by God’s grace, that blessing will be made manifest to
the world.
Recognizing God’s blessing and the work of the Spirit in relationships of lifelong commitment, the Church
rightly celebrates these moments of covenantal vocation. This divine calling, discerned by a couple and their
faith community, draws the Church deeper into God’s own mission of redeeming and sanctifying love in the
world. Christians express this calling in the ways we live our lives with others. Two of these ways deserve
attention here: shaping households and deepening faithful intimacy.

The Vocation of Households
Households today are most often associated with marriage and child-rearing, yet this has not always been the
case. The history of the Church offers a broader view of how households can bear witness to the gospel. Since
34

See Margaret A. Farley, Personal Commitments: Beginning, Keeping, Changing (New York: HarperCollins, 1990).

Page 21 of 106

it is finally God, and not another human being or anything else in creation, that fulfills and completes us, some
people feel called to remain unmarried or single. A single life, which is not necessarily the same as a solitary
life, can be lived in households of various types. Living in this way can allow individuals to be more available as
friends and companions; this is often the case with vowed religious life, such as a monastic calling. Indeed, for
the first half of its history (more than a thousand years), the Church understood vowed religious life as a calling
higher than marriage, a view that changed decisively only during the Protestant Reformation. The diverse
forms of an intentional single life may afford greater opportunity for contemplation, service, and mission,
which some people understand as a particular vocational calling into deeper relationship with God and the
world. This seems to be Paul’s understanding of the spiritual significance of remaining unmarried (1 Corinthians
7:25–32).
Paul also discusses human sexuality in relation to God’s gracious covenant with us in Christ in the first chapter
of his letter to the Romans. This chapter, especially verses 26–27, has been used to support the Church’s
reluctance to embrace the loving faithfulness of same-sex couples and continues to influence conversation in
Christian communities.
In interpreting this Pauline passage, it is difficult to know precisely what Paul meant by “unnatural  in those
verses and to whom he was addressing these concerns. 35 Significantly, Paul’s description of sexual behavior
in the first chapter appears in direct relation to his condemnation of idolatry. For Paul, the consequence—not
the cause—of worshiping false gods is a distorted understanding of sexuality, its purpose and goal (Romans
1:22–23). In the Greco-Roman world of the first century, those distortions of sexuality with which Paul was
most likely familiar included a range of practices associated with cults devoted to fertility gods and goddesses.
Some interpreters have claimed that these cultic rituals may have included self-castration, drunken orgies, and
sex with young male and female temple prostitutes.36 Christians rightly condemn all those behaviors as
violations of the human body, the very temple of the Holy Spirit, Paul insisted (1 Corinthians 3:16–17).
Moreover, some interpreters say, those alleged ancient cultic practices have nothing to do with today’s samesex Christian couples.37
Paul’s broader insight, however, still compels the Church to continual discernment and assessment of its
common life: proper worship corresponds directly to proper sexual relations. This insight can shed even
further light on Paul’s recommendation to the Christians in Corinth that they remain unmarried.
In the end, human sexual relationships of any kind are not the purpose or goal of human life. Instead, union
with God in Christ is the goal for all, including the whole created order, as the rest of Paul’s letter to the Romans
makes clear (Romans 8:18–25). At their best, human relationships can only point us toward that final
fulfillment. People who make an intentional decision to remain unmarried place important signposts on that
spiritual journey to which all of us are called and in which nothing, including marriage, should supplant our
primary devotion to God and to God’s household, the Church.
Other types of relationships teach us that to prepare us for life with God, God can bind us with another for life.
Thus, some (though not all) covenantal commitments are enacted in households, those intimate spaces where
35

See L. William Countryman, Dirt, Greed, and Sex: Sexual Ethics in the New Testament and Their Implications for Today, revised edition
(Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2007), 119–123. See also Dale B. Martin, “Heterosexism and the Interpretation of Romans 1:18–32,  in
Sex and the Single Savior: Gender and Sexuality in Biblical Interpretation (Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 2006), 51–64. Some
interpreters have noted that Paul uses the phrase often translated as “contrary to nature  in Romans 1 again in Romans 11:24 to
describe the love of God in saving those same Gentiles; see William Stacy Johnson, A Time to Embrace: Same-Gender Relationships in
Religion, Law, and Politics (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing Company, 2006), 98–99.
36 For the controversy over ancient fertility cults and the alleged sexual practices associated with them, see Robert A. Oden, Jr., The
Bible Without Theology: The Theological Tradition and Alternatives to It (San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1987), especially chapter 5,
“Religious Identity and the Sacred Prostitution Accusation,  131–153.
37 See Martti Nissinen, Homoeroticism in the Biblical World: A Historical Perspective (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1998), 103–113.

Page 22 of 106

people encounter each other as their nearest neighbors daily and continually. 38 Clearly, the character, shape,
and form of a household have varied enormously over time, from the patriarchal and polygamous families of
ancient Israel to the family Jesus created between his mother and his beloved disciple (John 19:26–27) and the
economic reordering of familial relations among early believers (Acts 4:32–37, 5:1–7). What “household 
means and how people may be called, as a vocation, into covenantal households matter not only in light of
historical differences but also in the midst of the wide range of household customs and organizational patterns
found throughout the world today.
Appreciating the significant cultural differences between the households of ancient Israel and today’s
Western, nuclear families can also inform our interpretation of two biblical passages cited as a scriptural
warrant for rejecting the loving faithfulness of same-sex couples: Leviticus 18:22 and its analogue, 20:13. These
two verses belong to an extensive array of dietary restrictions, commandments, and ritual practices often
referred to as the “Levitical holiness code.  Two features of ancient Israelite society are important in
interpreting these difficult passages: the process of constructing a religious identity for Israel distinct from its
surrounding cultures, and the strict gender hierarchy of the ancient Mediterranean world. 39
Leviticus 18:22 condemns sex between men, and, more particularly, treating a man like a woman. The Hebrew
word used for this condemnation, translated as “abomination,  appears most often with reference to the
cultic practices associated with the worship of foreign gods; similar condemnations of child sacrifice and
bestiality in Leviticus 18 strengthen the connection to idolatrous rituals.40 Equally important, patriarchy placed
a high premium on male privilege. Sexual practices reflected this gendered ordering as men were expected to
take an active role and women a passive one, reflecting and perpetuating male dominance in all other spheres
of cultural and religious life and reinforcing the treatment of women as property. Sexual relations in the
ancient Near Eastern cultural context were defined by who had power over whom. So, according to this
worldview, sex between men would violate male privilege and disrupt the patriarchal ordering of society. 41
Ancient Israelite culture, which the Levitical holiness code was meant to uphold, differs significantly from the
egalitarian ideals toward which many Christian families strive in modern Western culture (and indeed in other
locales as well).42 Likewise, the distinctive concerns shared by both the ancient Israelites and Paul to reject the
sexual practices associated with idolatrous cults are in no way applicable to the lives of faithful Christians today
who identify themselves as gay or lesbian. These historical and cultural differences, however, do not render
these biblical passages irrelevant: Scripture continues to bear witness to the primacy of covenantal
relationship with the one true God of Israel, whom Christians believe and proclaim is revealed decisively in the

38

Thomas E. Breidenthal, Christian Households: The Sanctification of Nearness (Eugene, Oregon: Wipf and Stock, 2004).
Insights from Jewish commentators and scholars on these and other important aspects of biblical interpretation deserve renewed
attention in Christian communities. See, for example, Steven Greenberg, Wrestling with God and Men: Homosexuality in the Jewish
Tradition (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2004); and Daniel Boyarin, Carnal Israel: Reading Sex in Talmudic Culture (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1995).
40 See Nissinen, Homoeroticism in the Biblical World, 37–56. Paul would likely have known the connection between the Levitical
holiness code and idolatrous cults as well, which lends further support to interpreting the first chapter of Romans with reference to
temple prostitution.
41 Jack Rogers, Jesus, the Bible, and Homosexuality: Explode the Myths, Heal the Church, revised edition (Louisville: Westminster John
Knox Press, 2009), 68–69.
42 The treatment not only of women but also of children as property, as well as the practice of keeping concubines and slaves in
ancient Mediterranean households, mark these differences even further. See Carol L. Meyers, “Everyday Life: Women in the Period
of the Hebrew Bible,  in Women’s Bible Commentary, ed. Carol A. Newsom and Sharon H. Ringe, expanded edition (Louisville:
Westminster John Knox Press, 1998), 251–59; Gale A. Yee, Poor Banished Children of Eve: Woman as Evil in the Hebrew Bible
(Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2003), 29–58; and Amy L. Wordelman, “Everyday Life: Women in the Period of the New Testament,  in
Women’s Bible Commentary, 482–88.
39

Page 23 of 106

life, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ. Scripture would have us make that divine covenant primary in the
ordering of our household relations in culturally appropriate ways.
In households formed by married different-sex couples and covenanted same-sex couples alike, the process
of conforming to the likeness of Christ and striving toward holiness of life unfolds in deeply shared
accountability. The couple continually attempts to place their desires within the vows and commitments they
have made to each other. Living together in a household may provide the stability which makes possible the
vulnerability necessary to self-giving and other-receiving.43 In a household, the members of the couple become
one another’s nearest neighbor so that they may grow together in the love of God. The household shelters
the daily practice, which Jesus urged, of finding one’s life by giving it to another.
For same-sex couples as for married different-sex couples, households provide the structure for the daily life
of covenanted closeness: laboring to provide for one another and to support family, organizing a household
and its daily table, maintaining and sharing property, caring for another in sickness and at death.44 Households
may be schools for virtue and for penance and reconciliation, as well as habitations of mutual support and joy,
places for glimpsing and also deepening our experience of the presence of God. People living alone, who are
single, bereaved, or divorced, are also called to live out their baptismal vocation by the love, service,
hospitality, and accountability of their relationships within the Church and in the communities of which they
are a part, as well as through their service of prayer to others.
A household formed by a couple in a covenantal relationship can remind all of us of our incorporation into the
paschal mystery through baptism, in which we are received into the household of God and encouraged to
“confess the faith of Christ crucified, proclaim his resurrection, and share … in his eternal priesthood.  45 In
their household, a couple faces the many ways in which their faith forms their daily lives. They offer themselves
daily to each other in order to become part of the other’s life, dying to sin and rising to a new life directed
toward love of neighbor and love of God. In this giving of self and receiving of another, we see the gracious
pattern of God’s own triune life into which we are, more and more, caught up and transformed for mission.
In households we also see an image of the eucharist. The household tables around which couples in covenantal
relationship gather evoke the eucharistic table around which we gather as the community of believers. In the
household, as at the eucharist, couples take what is given to them and offer it to God. They are nourished and
blessed by what they receive, and the Spirit then empowers them to be a blessing to others and to God. In a
household, as at the eucharistic table, what God has joined together may become one body, and the Spirit
may distribute a household’s gifts to many. In households, same-sex as well as different-sex couples in
covenantal relationships strive to imitate Jesus, who gave himself bodily for those he loved.
To give one’s self over to love, care, and commitment in solidarity with another person, for better for worse,
in sickness and in health, till death do us part, is daily and bodily to partake in the reconciling work of God in
Christ. In the lives of intimate couples, sexual desire for one another can be forged into covenantal witness to
the gospel.

Faithful Intimacy
The movement from sexual desire into faithful intimacy and covenantal commitment marks a particular kind
of vocational path, which for Christians shapes the passion of eros into the affection of agape for the good of
43

Rowan Williams, “The Body’s Grace,  in Our Selves, Our Souls and Bodies: Sexuality and the Household of God, ed. Charles Hefling
(Cambridge, MA: Cowley Publications, 1996), 58–68.
44 See Deirdre J. Good, Willis J. Jenkins, Cynthia B. Kittredge, and Eugene F. Rogers, Jr., “A Theology of Marriage including Same-Sex
Couples: A View from the Liberals,  Anglican Theological Review 93:1 (Winter 2011): 63–64.
45 Holy Baptism, BCP, 308.

Page 24 of 106

the Church and the world. Theological reflection on this path begins by affirming the goodness of sexual desire
itself. Indeed, sexual desire is a metaphor for God’s desire to be in relationship with us and the whole creation.
Scripture and Christian tradition draw on sexually intimate relationships to point to the God who is Love and
who stands in relationships of love with all creation. The long tradition of commentary on the biblical Song of
Songs, for example, illustrates the spiritual significance of sexual relationships and the fruitfulness of
reflecting theologically on the commitment of sexually intimate couples. 46 In such reflection, we can realize
and appreciate that “the whole story of creation, incarnation, and our incorporation into the fellowship of
Christ’s body tells us that God desires us.  The good news of God’s desire for us can then shape our intimate
commitments and the life of the wider Christian community so that all of us may see ourselves as desired, as
“the occasion of joy. 47
The gift of human sexuality, established by God in creation, can be a source of sustaining joy, reminding us
bodily of the abundance God intends for the whole creation. In the mutual self-offering of one to another in a
sexual relationship of fidelity, we can catch a glimpse of the delight God exhibits for each of us. Yet sexual
desire is also fraught with risk because it draws us into relationships of vulnerability, where not only the
brightest and best dimensions of ourselves are offered to another but also where the painful aspects are
exposed, the ones that we often prefer to keep hidden and that need healing. Sexual desire and intimacy make
us vulnerable so that God can turn our limits to our good, showing us that we are not our own but belong to
someone else.
Faithful relationships of sexual intimacy can also be an occasion to bear witness to God’s love as they form the
couples more fully in the image of Christ. In marriage, the Church blesses and celebrates these relationships
as potential vehicles for God’s grace. Many in the Episcopal Church today have come to believe that this is as
true for same-sex couples as it is for different-sex couples.48 Others, however, understand the doctrine of
creation differently and believe that God’s gift of human sexuality is intended only for different-sex couples.
Even the language of “same-sex  and “different-sex  raises many complex questions, not only biologically,
socially, and culturally, but also and especially biblically.
Genesis 1 and 2, for example, are often cited to support two interrelated convictions: first, that “gender
complementarity  describes God’s creation of human beings as male and female; and second, that such
complementarity is best expressed in the procreation of children within monogamous marriage. The extensive
biblical scholarship available on these passages—in both Jewish and Christian traditions—nuances those two
convictions in some important ways.
In the first of the two creation accounts (Genesis 1:26–27), gender differentiation is attributed to the whole
human species rather than to individuals, just as both male and female alike apply to God, in whose image
humanity is made.49 Similarly, the command to “be fruitful and multiply  (Genesis 1:28) is given to the human
species, not to each individual. If this were not the case, people “who are single, celibate, or who for whatever
reason do not have children—including Jesus of Nazareth —would be viewed as “disobedient sinners.  50
Moreover, the generative aspects of a loving and faithful commitment can be seen in many different ways,
46

David M. Carr, The Erotic Word: Sexuality, Spirituality, and the Bible (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003). See also Douglas
Burton-Christie, “Into the Body of Another: Eros, Embodiment and Intimacy with the Natural World,  Anglican Theological Review 81:1
(Winter 1999): 13–37.
47 Williams, “The Body’s Grace,  in Our Selves, Our Souls and Bodies, 59.
48 To Set Our Hope on Christ, 8–9, 24–25.
49 Some ancient Talmudic commentaries suggest, for example, that the original human shared with God all of the possible gender
characteristics, which were later divided between “male  and “female.  This text, in other words, raises a host of questions which
the text itself does not address concerning gender and sexuality in both humanity and God. See Howard Eilberg-Schwartz, ed.,
People of the Body: Jews and Judaism from an Embodied Perspective (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992).
50 Johnson, A Time to Embrace, 115–16.

Page 25 of 106

not only in bearing and raising children. For same-sex couples, as one Episcopal bishop has pointed out, “the
care and nurture of those already in the world may be a mission more excellently fulfilled by those who do not
have the concerns of child-rearing. 51
The second account in Genesis refers specifically to the creation of distinct individuals (Genesis 2:7–22), and
introduces something that is not good in God’s creation: “It is not good,  God declares, “for the human being
to be alone. 52 Here the story turns on the importance of companionship and not, as in the first account, on
the procreation of children. Significantly, the companion God provides for the solitary human is not defined
by “otherness  but by suitable similarity. In this passage, “there is no emphasis … on ‘difference’ or
‘complementarity’ at all—in fact, just the opposite. When Adam sees Eve, he does not celebrate her otherness
but her sameness: what strikes him is that she is ‘bone of my bones, flesh of my flesh.’  Reducing this story to
the fitness of particular anatomical parts misses the poignancy of this story: “God sees the plight of this first
human being and steps in and does whatever it takes to provide him with a life-giving, life-sustaining
companion. 53 Rather than focusing on marriage, these creation accounts affirm God as the creator of all
things and “the priority of human companionship. 54
Genesis 1 and 2 can and should continue to shape, inform, and energize the Church’s faithful witness to the
God revealed in Scripture. These passages can do so as the Church proclaims God as the creator and affirms
the goodness of God’s creation, which includes the dignity of every human being as created in God’s image.
This affirmation remains vital, not least for the sake of embracing the full humanity of women. The unqualified
dignity with which the biblical writer treated both men and women in the account of their creation stands out
as quite remarkable in the patriarchal culture in which it was written.55
Paul, furthermore, would urge Christians to read the Genesis accounts of creation through the lens of the new
creation, which God has promised in Christ, the first fruits of which God has provided by raising Christ from
the dead (1 Corinthians 15:20–25). Living into that promise and anticipating its fulfillment, Paul urged the
Christians in Galatia to understand their baptism as erasing familiar social and cultural hierarchies: “As many
of you as were baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ. There is no longer Jew or Greek, there
is no longer slave or free, there is no longer male and female; for all of you are one in Christ Jesus  (Galatians
3:27–28).56 Rather than emphasizing the significance of gender, the faithfulness of sexually intimate couples
can contribute to the Church’s witness to the new life God offers in Christ and through the Spirit, which the
Church celebrates in the “sacraments of the new creation.  57 For both same-sex and different-sex couples,
then, the theological and moral significance of their covenantal commitment is rooted in the paschal mystery.

51

Marshall, Same-Sex Unions, 38.
Genesis 2:18 (for the significance of this translation of the verse, see Johnson, A Time to Embrace, 114–115, 117).
53 Johnson, A Time to Embrace, 120.
54 Johnson, A Time to Embrace, 114.
55 William Stacy Johnson notes, for example, that in ancient Mediterranean society, women were considered human beings but
decidedly deficient ones and were therefore rightly subservient to men (A Time to Embrace, 275, n.16). Dale B. Martin likewise relates
this ancient view of the inferiority of women—as “deficient men —to the difficulties in translating, let alone interpreting, two Greek
words in the New Testament that have been frequently cited regarding homosexuality. Those words appear in 1 Corinthians 6:9 and 1
Timothy 1:10. The words “sodomite  or “homosexual  have appeared in some English translations of those verses, but the meaning
of the Greek in both cases is obscure and elusive. Martin believes it likely that these words referred to cultural practices involving
sexual exploitation (perhaps including rape) and also effeminate behavior, which for men in that society triggered both alarm and
disgust (“Arsenokoitês and Malakos: Meanings and Consequences,  in Biblical Ethics and Homosexuality: Listening to Scripture, ed.
Robert L. Brawley [Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 1996], 117–36).
56 See Dale B. Martin, Sex and the Single Savior: Gender and Sexuality in Biblical Interpretation (Louisville: Westminster John Knox
Press, 2006), 77–90.
57 Among the many sources for this connection between the sacramental life of the Church and the divine promise of the new
creation, see Herbert McCabe, The New Creation (London: Continuum, 2010), where he refers to the Church’s sacraments as
52

Page 26 of 106

As in baptism and eucharist, the covenantal commitments of sexually intimate couples sweep their bodies up
into a grand and risky endeavor: to see if they can find their life in God by giving it to another. In these
covenants, two people vow to give themselves bodily and wholeheartedly to each other. They do this, in part,
to live out the promises of baptism while also living into the self-offering of Christ, as expressed at the
eucharistic table: “This is my body, given for you.  The lifelong commitment of covenanted couples can, by
God’s grace, testify to the love of God by signifying Christ and the Church. These commitments can thus evoke
for the wider community the very promise of the paschal mystery enacted in baptism and eucharist: we are
being drawn deeper into God’s own life where we learn that God’s love is stronger than death.
Sexually intimate couples can also testify to the love of neighbor by loving each other, a love that requires
both time and the sustenance of God’s grace. Covenantal couples can model this love, not as a static tableau
but as an ongoing school for virtue in which the practices of neighbor-love are developed, reformed, and
brought toward perfection. The moral significance of a covenantal relationship is its potential to bring each of
the covenant partners up against their embodied limits as finite creatures and to become willing to be
vulnerable to another. A covenantal commitment challenges and inspires each partner to self-offering as each
lives out with the other the relation of Christ and the Church (Ephesians 5:21–33). Members of a couple urge
each other forward in growth, which occurs through and with the creaturely limitations that Christ took on
for our good: the limits of time and the body. Our desires, including our sexual desires, “can be an especially
intense and unsettling reminder of our radical availability to the other. Like parental affection or simple
compassion, sexual desire can cause our heart to ‘belong’ to another. ... This desire shatters any illusions we
may have regarding our ability to choose when and if we shall be connected to others; indeed, it is itself a
warrant for the claim that our fundamental relation to one another is one of connection. 58
Giving ourselves to another, as Christ gave himself for the world, takes time and the willingness to risk the
vulnerability inherent to the commitment of love. The movement of sexual desire toward intimacy and into
commitment begins as we give ourselves over to another in faithful relation and continues toward the final
moment of committal, surrendering our lives to God. This movement describes a lifelong, deliberate process
that, with obedience and faithfulness, produces visible holiness and the fruits of the Spirit. Both for the good
of the couple and for the good of the Church, God blesses this loving, intimate commitment. This blessing, in
turn, empowers the couple for their ministry in the world and energizes the Church for mission.

Mutual Blessing and Fruitfulness
As Christians, all of our relationships—as single people, in households, as intimate couples—are occasions to
live more fully into our Baptismal Covenant and participate more deeply in the paschal mystery of Christ’s
death and resurrection enacted at the eucharistic table. The commitment we exhibit in our relationships—to
love our neighbor as we love ourselves and as God loves each of us in Christ—thus becomes a source of
blessing for the whole Church.
This broad framework of covenantal relationship for the Church’s life offers a way to reflect on the significance
of the many types of covenants with which the Church is blessed—in ordination, monastic vows, marriage,
and also in same-sex relationships. The blessing of any relationship is a blessing not only for those in a
relationship but also and equally for the wider community in which the relationship is lived. This mutual
blessing is exhibited in many ways, not least by enabling those engaged in such relationships to manifest the

“mysteries of human unity  insofar as we are, through the sacraments, being incorporated into the new creation God is bringing
about (xii).
58 Thomas Breidenthal, “Sanctifying Nearness,  in Theology and Sexuality: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. Eugene F. Rogers,
Jr. (Oxford: Blackwell, 2002), 345.

Page 27 of 106

fruits of the Spirit (Galatians 5:22–23), which they might not have done apart from the relationship. Discerning
the gifts of the Spirit in a relationship is one reason a faith community blesses that relationship.
In addition, pronouncing a blessing can become an important occasion for deepening the process of
sanctification. Many couples desire this—and they need it. God can use the vulnerability of intimacy and the
giving of ourselves to another to expose our weaknesses, make us better, set us apart, and spur our moral
growth. The Church in turn can witness to the sanctifying work of the Spirit as God transforms the energy of
eros into the virtues of faith, hope, and love.
A blessing changes a couple as they become more aware of God’s grace and are commissioned by the Church
to bear witness to the paschal mystery. A blessing changes the Church as well: holiness of life is made more
manifest, so the community becomes accountable for supporting the couple as they grow into the sanctifying
work of the Spirit.
Entering into a covenant of faithfulness with another human being is one among many ways Christians live
out their baptismal calling in the world. As covenantal households are shaped by lives given over to service,
compassion, generosity, and hospitality, the grace encountered at the eucharistic table is further manifested
in the world. Thus, the fruitfulness of covenantal relationships and the blessings they offer to the Church
belong to the mission of the Church in its ongoing witness to the gospel of Jesus Christ and our hope of union
with God. This is the very source of our desire for communion with another.

4. The Church’s Challenge: Christian Unity and Biblical Interpretation
O God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, our only Savior, the Prince of Peace:
Give us grace seriously to lay to heart the great dangers we are in by our
unhappy divisions; take away all hatred and prejudice, and whatever else may
hinder us from godly union and concord; that, as there is but one Body and
one Spirit, one hope of our calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God
and Father of us all, so we may be all of one heart and of one soul, united in
one holy bond of truth and peace, of faith and charity, and may with one
mind and one mouth glorify thee; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
— “For the Unity of the Church,  BCP, 818

Christian unity with God and one another in Christ is a precious gift; likewise, our differences as believers are
gifts to be honored because these differences belong to God’s created order. Through these gifts we are
equipped for “building up the body of Christ, until all of us come to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge
of the Son of God  (Ephesians 4:12–13).
The Book of Common Prayer (1979) encourages Episcopalians to pray for Christian unity by recalling the Pauline
letter to the Ephesians. This letter reminds us that our bonds of affection are rooted not in our own efforts
but in God’s gracious gift in baptism. There is but one Body and one Lord. There is but one baptism, by which
we are joined—heart, soul, and mind—to one another (Ephesians 4:5). Most of all, as the prayer quoted above
reminds us, this baptismal unity serves the Christian call to praise and glorify God.
In baptism, God binds us to God’s own self by binding us to others who are different from us, linking our
salvation inextricably to the salvation of others. Furthermore, the divine gift of unity in no way relies on

Page 28 of 106

uniformity. We are not united, one to the other, because we agree but because God has joined us together. 59
The bond we share in baptism makes room for us to disagree with one another within the bonds of affection
we share as members of God’s own household of love and grace. We enact this unity by continuing “in the
apostles’ teaching and fellowship, in the breaking of bread, and in the prayers. 60 We cannot live into this gift
on our own, but with “sighs too deep for words,  the Spirit “helps us in our weakness  (Romans 8:26). The
Spirit slowly takes, offers, and transforms all the prayers of those who disagree with one another to make
them occasions to manifest the Body of Christ more visibly in the world and in the Church as well. In this
ongoing process of sanctification, we proclaim that we are marked as Christ’s own forever as members of the
Body of Christ.61 This foundational reality of our shared life sends us out to the world in witness to Christ’s
reconciling love.62
The challenges in making God’s gift of unity more and more visible appear, for example, within the New
Testament concerning the divisions in the Corinthian church (1 Corinthians 3:1–9), in Paul’s reminder to the
Romans that the body includes many diverse members (Romans 12:3–8), and perhaps most notably in Paul’s
baptism of non-Jews, which caused a debate with Peter over how to interpret their inherited Scriptures. Paul
recounts this disagreement in his letter to the Galatians (2:2–21). Peter’s vision (Acts 10:9–16) prior to
encountering Cornelius, a Roman centurion, and interacting with other Gentiles, moved him to declare that
no one should be called “profane or unclean  (Acts 10:28), and to urge his fellow apostles not to withhold the
water of baptism from those who had received the Holy Spirit just as they had (Acts 10:47). The inclusion of
Gentiles who did not observe dietary laws within the household of the God of Israel overturned centuries of
biblical interpretation.
Throughout the Church’s history, Christians have endeavored to follow that apostolic practice of prayerful
deliberation in the light of Scripture and to discern the will of God—“what is good and acceptable and perfect 
(Romans 12:2)—in each new time and place. As the Body of Christ, our fundamental call is to live together not
only when we agree in our discernment but also when the Spirit leads faithful Christians to hold more than
one view. Different interpretations of Scripture are possible, provided they lead us to love God and one
another.63
General Convention Resolution 2009–C056 acknowledges differences of opinion within the Episcopal Church
concerning the interpretation of Scripture and same-sex relationships. This theological resource has presented
interpretations of some of the most difficult of these biblical passages to support the covenants of same-sex
couples while understanding that some members of the Episcopal Church continue to hear the word of the
Lord differently in these passages. All of us have more to learn from Scripture and from each other. The Spirit
baptizes us all in the name of Jesus, who is himself the Word of God and the Lord of Scripture. In faithfulness
to Christ, we acknowledge and respect those differences among us in our fervent hope that disagreements

59

See Thomas E. Breidenthal, “Communion as Disagreement,  in Gays and the Future of Anglicanism: Responses to the Windsor
Report, ed. Andrew Linzey and Richard Kirker (Ropley, UK: O Books, 2005), 188–198.
60 “The Baptismal Covenant,  BCP, 304.
61 The centrality of baptism in our common life has been championed by a series of Anglican leaders, starting with Thomas Cranmer
and including F. D. Maurice and William Reed Huntington. As Paul Avis describes it, Anglican ecclesiology depends on the insistence
that “what unites us to Christ [that is, baptism] is all that is necessary to unite us, sacramentally, to each other  (The Identity of
Anglicanism: Essentials of Anglican Ecclesiology [London: T&T Clark, 2007], 111).
62 On baptismal ecclesiology, see Weil, A Theology of Worship, 22–28.
63 Augustine of Hippo believed that the command in Genesis to “increase and multiply  (1:22, 28) applied not only to the procreation
of children but also to the proliferation of textual meanings of Scripture. Augustine also believed that there were limits to multiple
interpretations: no interpretation of Scripture could be considered ethically Christian if it violated the commandment to love God and
one’s neighbor. See Dale B. Martin, Pedagogy of the Bible: An Analysis and Proposal (Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 2008),
59, 83–84.

Page 29 of 106

over this biblical material need not divide the Church.64 Anglican Christians, along with Christians in many other
communions and historical eras, have discovered in ever new ways how the grace of God in Christ offers a
path toward unity even in the midst of profound disagreement.65
Our disagreements today belong in the context of the agreement we do enjoy concerning biblical
interpretation: the saving love and grace of God in Christ call us to be a holy people, living in faithfulness and
treating the human body as the temple of the Holy Spirit as we endeavor, with God’s help, to fulfill our
baptismal vows to “seek and serve Christ in all persons,  loving our neighbors as ourselves, to “strive for
justice and peace among all people,  and to “respect the dignity of every human being. 66 In such agreement,
the love with which we treat each other is to be modeled on the love of God for God’s people, as well as on
the life and ministry of Jesus himself.
Scripture offers little material that would address modern notions of sexual orientation, and biblical writers
devoted relatively little attention to questions of same-sex relations. Biblical scholars are divided regarding
the translation and interpretation of the texts most often cited on this question.67 Some maintain that these
texts unequivocally forbid same-sex relationships; others argue that these texts do not refer to same-sex
relationships as we understand them today and that each text must be interpreted within its own historical
and literary contexts.68
Similar disagreements over biblical interpretation have marked the Church’s life throughout its history.
Faithful Christians struggled for centuries to understand whether Scripture encouraged a view of vowed
religious life as a higher calling than marriage. Churches have disagreed over the biblical condemnation of
“usury,  which originally meant charging interest on loaned money, and whether it applies to contemporary
economic systems. Protestant reformers disagreed about biblical interpretations of the eucharist and even
whether particular biblical books ought to remain in the canon of Scripture. English reformers wrestled with
differing biblical views concerning liturgical vestments, Church music, the relationship between Church and
state, sacramental theology, and the role of ordained ministers.69
The Episcopal Church has struggled with how to interpret Scripture amid cultural change, whether concerning
economic reform, divorce and remarriage, or contraception.70 The practice of slavery and the role of women
are two areas in which major departures from the biblical text have been especially controversial. Christians,
including Episcopalians, in the nineteenth century used the Bible extensively to justify the institution of slavery,
64

Rowan Williams has noted, for example, that writers in our shared Anglican history have often turned to “a theologically informed
and spiritually sustained patience  as Anglican Christianity continues to grow and change. These writers, Williams says, “do not
expect human words to solve their problems rapidly, they do not expect the Bible to yield up its treasures overnight. ... They know
that as Christians they live among immensities of meaning, live in the wake of a divine action which defies summary explanation.
They take it for granted that the believer is always learning (Anglican Identities [Cambridge, MA: Cowley Publications, 2003], 7).
65 While the Church’s history is replete with many such examples, for illustrations from Anglican history, see William L. Sachs, The
Transformation of Anglicanism: From State Church to Global Communion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), esp. chap. 4,
“The Struggle to Define the Church and its Belief,  120–63.
66 “The Baptismal Covenant,  BCP, 305.
67 Those texts are Genesis 1–2, Genesis 19, Leviticus 18:22 and 20:13, Romans 1, 1 Corinthians 6:9, 1 Timothy 1:10, and Jude 7.
68 An overview of these positions appears in an issue of the Anglican Theological Review devoted to same-sex marriage; it offers “two
interpretations of doctrinal and scriptural faithfulness that fundamentally disagree  (Ellen T. Charry, “Preface,  Anglican Theological
Review 93:1 [Winter 2011]: xiv). The two major essays in this issue of the journal originated as a project commissioned in spring 2008
by the House of Bishops of the Episcopal Church, to be overseen by the Theology Committee of the House of Bishops.
69 For a history of the various ways the Church has read difficult biblical passages, see John L. Thompson, Reading the Bible with the
Dead: What You Can Learn from the History of Exegesis That You Can’t Learn from Exegesis Alone (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing
Company, 2007).
70 For an overview of challenges in biblical interpretation for a wide range of ethical concerns in the Episcopal Church, see Robert E.
Hood, Social Teachings in the Episcopal Church (Harrisburg: Morehouse Publishing, 1990).

Page 30 of 106

particularly in the United States.71 In 1863, for example, Presiding Bishop John Henry Hopkins of Vermont
published a paper called “Bible View of Slavery,  which defended slavery as “fully authorized both in the Old
and New Testament,  defining it as “servitude for life, descending to the offspring. 72
The struggle to ordain women in the Episcopal Church also involved deep conflicts over biblical interpretation.
Supporters of women’s ordination based their arguments on the gospel’s promise of freedom and wholeness
for all, while opponents believed that the maleness of the disciples named in the New Testament established
an unalterable tradition of male priesthood.73
The Episcopal Church eventually changed its positions regarding slavery and the ordination of women. The
diversity of approaches to Scripture in both cases made these decisions contentious. Serious questions
continue to be posed about how we understand the authority of Scripture, not only concerning slavery and
the status of women but also, now, same-sex relationships. All three of these issues have threatened to divide
the Church. No one today would justify the institution of slavery, but the worldwide Anglican Communion
continues to live with disagreement about ordaining women and blessing same-sex relationships. With
previous generations of the faithful who struggled in similar ways, our present disagreements need not
compromise our shared witness to the good news of God in Christ as we look toward that day when our partial
knowledge will be complete (1 Corinthians 13:12) and when God will be “all in all  (1 Corinthians 15:28).
The hope we share for that day of final fulfillment in Christ does not thereby erase the challenge of living into
God’s gracious gift of unity today. For most Christians, this means noting carefully the limits of acceptable
differences; beyond those limits, the claim to Christian unity would prove difficult if not impossible. The
challenge, then, is not whether limits to our differences exist, but how to discern when we have crossed those
limits, and over what kinds of questions (whether doctrinal, moral, or liturgical, for example) we may hold
differing beliefs and still remain in communion.74 In the debate over same-sex relationships and biblical
interpretation, Anglican Christians have disagreed about this process of discernment. Some Episcopalians
have concluded that blessing such relationships goes beyond the limits of acceptable difference, and, acting
on their conscience, they have parted company with the Episcopal Church, while others who disagree have
chosen to remain. Our Church will continue to live with varying approaches to Scripture on this question.
At a pivotal moment among early believers, recorded in Acts 15, the possibility of including Gentiles in the
Christian family sparked considerable controversy. The importance of this historical moment today lies not in
the first-century differences between Jews and Gentiles but in the process of prayerful deliberation those
early believers adopted. Facing the real possibility of irreparable division, the apostles sought a way to honor
the centrality of Scripture while also attending carefully to the ongoing movement of the Spirit in their midst.
The Acts of the Apostles recounts that certain believers from the sect of the Pharisees were insisting that men
could not be saved unless they were circumcised and kept the law of Moses (Acts 15:5). As the apostles and
elders in Jerusalem considered this question, Peter (who had been persuaded by Paul’s point of view)
confirmed the work of the Holy Spirit among the Gentiles: “God, who knows the human heart, testified to
them by giving them the Holy Spirit, just as he did to us; and in cleansing their hearts by faith he has made no
distinction between them and us  (Acts 15:8–9). James considered this testimony and concluded that the
71

Stephen R. Haynes, Noah’s Curse: The Biblical Justification of American Slavery (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002).
John Henry Hopkins, “Bible View of Slavery,  Papers from the Society for the Diffusion of Political Knowledge, no. 8 (1863): 132, 117;
see also John Henry Hopkins, A Scriptural, Ecclesiastical, and Historical View of Slavery, From the Days of the Patriarch Abraham, to the
Nineteenth Century (New York: W. I. Pooley and Co., 1864), 6.
73 Pamela W. Darling, New Wine: The Story of Women Transforming Leadership and Power in the Episcopal Church (Cambridge, MA:
Cowley Publications, 1994), 149.
74 For observations concerning matters that are essential to Christian life and those over which we may have legitimate differences
of opinion, see To Set Our Hope on Christ, 49–52.
72

Page 31 of 106

Spirit’s work urged a reconsideration of Scripture and an expansion of the gospel’s reach to include Gentiles
(Acts 15:13–21).
Acts 15 stands among other key biblical moments in which God’s people have found their vision broadened to
see a new thing God is bringing about (Isaiah 43:18–21), their assumptions challenged by the outpouring of
God’s Spirit where they had not expected it (Numbers 11:26–29; Joel 2:28), and the startling first fruits of God’s
new creation in raising Jesus Christ from the dead (1 Corinthians 15:20–25). These biblical turning points, in
themselves, will not settle today’s disagreements, yet they urge the same apostolic process of prayerful
deliberation: reliance on the centrality of Scripture while attending carefully to the Spirit’s work in our midst.75
The Episcopal Church listened closely to the Spirit concerning slavery and the ordination of women. We are
summoned today to listen to the narratives of sanctification and holiness within the relationships of same-sex
couples and to discern and testify to the work of God in their lives. As we listen, we trust in that Spirit who, as
Jesus promised, will lead us further into truth (John 16:13), praying as Christ himself did for our unity with each
other in God (John 17:11) and blessing God for God’s abundant goodness in Christ so that, with Paul, we may
share more fully in the blessings of the gospel (1 Corinthians 9:23).

75

See Stephen E. Fowl, “How the Spirit Reads and How to Read the Spirit,  in Engaging Scripture: A Model for Theological
Interpretation (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 1998), 97–127; Jeffrey S. Siker, “How to Decide? Homosexual Christians, the Bible,
and Gentile Inclusion,  Theology Today 51:2 (July 1994): 219–34; and Rogers, Jesus, the Bible, and Homosexuality, 89–90.

Page 32 of 106

Responses to “Faith, Hope, and Love 
The essays in this section, collected by the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music during the 2012-2015
triennium, represent the viewpoints of the individual authors rather than the consensus of the Commission.

a. Thomas E. Breidenthal
Thomas E. Breidenthal is the Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Southern Ohio.

In “Faith, Hope, and Love: Theological Resources for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships,  the Standing
Commission on Liturgy and Music offers a thoughtful reflection on what the Church is saying and doing when
it blesses a same-sex union. The argument can be summarized as follows: (1) The Church blesses moral
practices that make for holiness; (2) holiness is conformation to the mission of God; (3) the mission of God is
reconciliation between God and us, and between us and one another; (4) this boils down to love of God and
love of neighbor; (5) faithful, monogamous same-sex unions are good incubators of this love; (6) therefore in
blessing these unions the Church sees and affirms a moral practice that makes for holiness. What we are doing
is invoking God’s favor to develop a couple’s capacity for love of God and neighbor and to empower them for
mission.
Commendably, the Standing Commission insists that blessed unions are not a private affair, but are
accountable to the Christian community as a whole. The essay notes that this is true for “different-sex 
couples as well, though they might “likewise find this to be a new way of thinking about their own marital
vows  (III.3). Also, it invites us to approach same-sex unions in the wider context of Christian householding,
thus reminding us that intentional communities (monastic and otherwise), as well as the single life, can form
us for God’s mission. That mission, defined as reconciliation, is firmly grounded both in the Trinity and in our
own need and capacity for community, “created in the Trinitarian image of God, an image that is inherently
relational  (III.3). That image is perfected in Jesus, in whom the self-giving and eternal love of the divine
persons is played out in Christ’s death and resurrection on our behalf. We are most in sync with God and with
our God-given nature when we give our life for another, and we understand the paschal mystery—what Jesus’
death and resurrection accomplished—when we give our life to another and receive it back restored and
transformed. Finally, “Faith, Hope, and Love  makes clear connections between self-giving and the Church’s
two main sacraments. Baptism unites us with Christ in his death and resurrection, and the eucharist sustains
our union with him through a lifetime of schooling in love.
Still, this essay raises several concerns. Most importantly, the underlying argument is obscured and sometimes
contradicted by undue emphasis on the preexisting goodness of the unions that we bless. The essay rightly
seeks to ground Christian householding in the eucharistic pattern of the Christian life, but in so doing seems
at times to blur the distinction between this ground and the practices which it supports: “[The] eucharistic
pattern—often described with the actions take, bless, break, and give—shapes all the relationships that we
bring into our baptismal life with God. We take these relationships, bless God for their goodness, ask God to
bless them and break them open further to divine grace, so that we may give them to the world as witnesses
to the gospel of Jesus Christ  (III.3). This and other such statements are true taken on their own, but in
combination with the claim that blessed unions are set apart just as the eucharistic bread is set apart, they
convey a cumulative impression that these unions function primarily as vehicles of grace for a needy world. I
Page 33 of 106

do not dispute that this is a hoped-for by-product of all Christian householding, but I am not sure we should
view it as its goal. As the essay itself says, the purpose of a covenanted relationship is to help two people learn
how to love each other as Christ loves us. For most of us sinners, this is accomplishment enough, and it is for
the grace to achieve such love for one person in one lifetime that couples come seeking a blessing from the
Church. This is not to say that a sustained commitment to love another person completely does not mediate
grace to onlookers. But it is a grace made perfect in weakness (2 Cor. 12:9). It is as sinners that we enter into
sacred unions, and it is only in expectation of God’s sanctifying grace that we dare to call them sacred.
There is no doubt that the authors of “Faith, Hope, and Love  agree with this, since they speak of the grace
required to fulfill the purpose of a covenanted union: “The Church prays for the divine grace and favor the
couple will need to live into their commitment to each other with love, fidelity, and holiness of life  (III.1). Yet,
strikingly, help with temptation and sin is never included among the benefits of being blessed. Thus one comes
across sentences like this: “Members of a couple urge each other forward in growth, which occurs through
and with the creaturely limitations that Christ took on for our good: the limits of time and the body  (III.3).
What is left out here is the condition of fallen humanity that Christ did not take on, namely our sinfulness. It is
our sinfulness that makes us dangerous to one another, and renders every union risky. Surely it is with this
riskiness in mind that same-sex couples come seeking God’s aid and the Church’s support. Although the
Standing Commission’s essay acknowledges that dynamic, it clearly takes a backseat to a different,
problematic message: the Church’s blessing is first and foremost the recognition of goodness already present.
I understand that impulse. We want to right the balance and repent of our old derision—or at best, our
toleration—of faithful same-sex couples in our midst. It is also probably the case that since most couples
coming forward for a blessing have been together for a long time, the Church experiences its act of blessing
as long-overdue recognition and approval. Most of the couples that now come seeking a blessing have a long
history of faithful struggle together, and many have long been vehicles of grace to those around them. But
this season will soon be past, and we will see increasing numbers of gay and lesbian couples, many of them
young adults, who, like their heterosexual counterparts, really are just now making the move from trial or
experiment to mutual commitment. As that reality is borne in upon us, we will need to reemphasize a major
element of blessing that “Faith, Hope, and Love  downplays. In blessing any covenanted union, the Church
invokes God’s grace to bring to fruition a holy intention rendered fragile by inexperience and sin.
This leads me to a larger question about the Church’s approach to sexual morality in general. The Standing
Commission does not address this topic, nor was it asked to do so. Yet their discussion of same-sex blessings
begs that question, since, as I have already noted, they refer to blessed unions as being set apart: “The blessing
of the eucharistic table sets us apart as the Body of Christ in the world, called and empowered to proclaim the
gospel, just as the blessing of a covenantal relationship sets that relationship apart as ‘a sign of Christ’s love
to this sinful and broken world’  (III.2, with reference to BCP, 429). In so doing, the Commission intends to
stress that covenanted relationships are ordered to a specific vocation, namely, to draw others to the saving
work of Christ. I agree with that intention, but I do not think we should talk about these unions being set apart.
Such language suggests that lifelong unions are not necessarily the norm for sexual partners, but a particular
vocation taken on by a few. To be “set apart  implies being distinguished from a group that is both normative
and entirely acceptable. The obvious analogy is to clergy, who are set apart for specific ministries within the
Church. Here the laypersons comprise the normative group and clergy are the exception. Yet, though our
expectations of the two groups may differ somewhat, the same Baptismal Covenant obligates both. A less
obvious analogy, but one central to “Faith, Hope, and Love,  is to the bread set apart for the eucharist. All
bread is the good work of human hands, but we set some aside to become the Body of Christ. In each case,
out of something of positive value—the people of God and the bread of human labor—a part is extracted for
a particular purpose to serve the Church as a whole. “Faith, Hope, and Love  suggests that as the eucharistic
bread is set apart and blessed, so a covenanting couple that is blessed is set apart. But set apart from whom?
Clearly, from couples who have not committed to lifelong faithful monogamy. It is not so clear how we are to
Page 34 of 106

regard this other, supposedly larger and normative group. If we go with the relation of laity to clergy, or of
ordinary to eucharistic bread, then we imply that there is nothing amiss with couples who do not intend to be
faithful and monogamous. They are like good Catholics in the heyday of religious orders who chose marriage
over celibacy. Do we intend to draw a similarly benign contrast between sexually involved couples who intend
lifelong monogamous fidelity and those who do not? Have we abandoned the principle that sex should
ordinarily go hand in hand with commitment to permanence, however much we may fall short of that ideal? If
that is the case, we should admit it. If it is not the case, we need to say so.
Perhaps I am objecting to the language of this document because theological statements can and do generate
ancillary questions. Here’s one about the eucharist, which has a bearing on the discussion so far. Why does
“Faith, Hope, and Love  refer constantly to the blessing of bread and wine in the eucharist, and not, as is more
usual in our tradition, to their consecration? The essay repeatedly refers to the blessing of the eucharistic bread
and wine, and, quoting 1 Corinthians 10:16, to “the cup of blessing that we bless  (see III.2 and III.3). It goes on
to point out that the Great Thanksgiving is deeply rooted in the Jewish understanding of blessing. To bless
something is to bless God who made it, and in so doing to reveal its essential goodness as coming from God’s
hands. All this is true, and its bearing on what it means to bless anything is obvious. But to restrict the
eucharistic action to blessing diminishes it. We do not merely set the elements of bread and wine apart for a
sacred purpose. Having thanked God, we invoke the Holy Spirit to make Christ present to us in them. “The cup
of blessing that we bless, is it not  (to complete Paul’s phrase) “a communion in the blood of Christ?  By the
Spirit the elements are changed; they become Christ for us. By the same Spirit we are made Christ’s body—
the exodus body into which we are incorporated in baptism. There is a reason why the Book of Common Prayer
refers to this transformation as consecration, not blessing (BCP, 408). To bless is, indeed, to acknowledge
something good and to commend it to God’s use. By contrast, to consecrate is to set something apart in the
expectation that something essential about it will be changed. We believe that the elements of bread and
wine become the body and the blood of Christ. As Anglicans, we refrain from explicating that change further
(transubstantiation? consubstantiation? real presence?), but we do insist on the change. This is why the
eucharistic action is not only anamnesis (a recalling of what God has done for us), but requires epiclesis, going
beyond the Jewish prayer of blessing to ask the Father to send the Holy Spirit upon the bread and wine that
they may become Christ for us.
I draw attention to this distinction between blessing and consecration, not only because it has a bearing on
our understanding of the eucharist, but because it has a bearing on our understanding of the Church’s blessing
of sexual unions. We reserve the term “consecration  for change which effects union with Christ, whether of
the eucharistic elements or the gathered Church, or, secondarily, as a synonym for ordination, understood as
a setting apart to represent the Church as the Body of Christ. It is in union with Christ that the Church blesses.
Christ’s “This is my body  at the last supper, which anticipates his self-offering on the cross, also goes beyond
the Jewish blessing. In addition to blessing his Father, and so acknowledging the bread and wine as coming
from his hand, Jesus gives himself to us. In so doing he bestows life, healing, power, protection, comfort, and
direction on us. This bestowal is the fullness of what Christians mean by a blessing. Christ’s offering of himself
cannot be understood apart from its Jewish ground—gratitude to God for gifts received in right relation to
God—but it goes beyond this ground to stand in identification with God as God’s Word, both to bestow the
gifts of the Spirit and to cooperate with the Spirit in its work.
So blessing is, first and foremost, Christ’s blessing. This is a blessing poured out on sinners from the cross. It is
only in the acknowledgment of our sin that we can receive this blessing thankfully. But when we do receive it
thankfully, we enter into communion with Christ, because we own his death for us and, in thankful response,
are moved to spend the rest of our lives dying to sin. This is why Paul says that the cup of blessing is a
communion in the blood of Christ. Our thanksgiving—that is, our blessing of God—comes at the price of
repentance and loss. It is when our thanksgiving passes through that narrow door that our offering is accepted
Page 35 of 106

and returned to us as holy, bringing us into the presence of our risen Savior and transforming us into his Body.
Here, and only here, can we speak properly of the Church as offering its own or God’s blessing to anyone. The
Church blesses as the Body of Christ, but does so as a Body redeemed from sin—a joyful Body, to be sure, but
a chastened and humbled Body, too. We are always sinners blessing sinners.
This sensibility is discernible at various points in “Faith, Hope, and Love,  but its various elements never quite
coalesce. Once again, my hunch is that its authors were avoiding any suggestion that people in same-sex
unions struggle with sin, lest they expose such unions once again to being singled out as especially sinful. I
acknowledge the charity at play here. But in the long run we gain ground only if, for same-sex or heterosexual
unions, a clear line is drawn from sin to repentance, from repentance to grace, from grace to thanksgiving.

b. John E. Goldingay
John E. Goldingay is the David Allan Hubbard Professor of Old Testament at Fuller Theological Seminary
in Pasadena, California, and priest-in-charge of St. Barnabas Church, Pasadena.

When I lived in England, I knew quite well two women who had lived together for most of their adult lives. I
have reason to think it was a celibate relationship, but I have no basis for knowing whether they felt any sexual
attraction. I can imagine them giving each other a kiss or a hug before they went to bed each night in their
separate bedrooms. I might call their relationship quasi-covenantal; in their latter years, one of them had a
stroke, and the other looked after her and continued to make it possible for them to share a church
involvement and to take holidays together. The one on whom fell the major responsibility for caring once
commented wryly on the similarity of her situation and mine, because I had a similar responsibility for my
disabled wife.
It has been instructive for me to reflect on the “faith, hope, and love  expressed in that relationship, and I
could be glad to pray for God’s blessing on it—indeed, I probably did so. I am sad that it is harder nowadays
for such relationships to happen and to flourish without their being imagined to be something else.
Most of the essay on “Faith, Hope, and Love  comprises helpful reminders on the Church’s mission, on
blessing, on covenant, and on unity. But how far do these reminders apply to the blessing of same-sex
relationships (with the connotations this phrase has in our culture)? The essay refers to the earlier study
commissioned by the House of Bishops, which issued in a report outlining a “liberal  and a “traditionalist 
position regarding same-sex relationships. I was a member of the traditionalist group within the task force
that produced the study. “Faith, Hope, and Love  goes with the liberal position, as it must if it is to provide
support for the development of resources for the blessings of same-sex relationships. My comments here,
therefore, largely restate aspects of the traditionalist position.
First, the biblical arguments. To begin with, let us agree that Genesis 18–19 is irrelevant in light of the fact that
no one is arguing for the kind of sexual relationships described there. On the other hand, one might note that
Scripture does speak of same-sex relationships, such as those between Naomi and Ruth and between David
and Jonathan, that offer models for thinking about relationships like that between my two friends. (It has of
course been speculated that the two biblical relationships were same-sex relationships in our sense, but the
stories offer no pointer to that possibility—and the Old Testament does not shy away from referring to sex
when it is a significant aspect of a narrative; further, it is unlikely that the books describing these relationships
would have envisaged that possibility, or that the books would have found acceptance into the canon of
Scripture on that hypothesis.)

Page 36 of 106

The arguments that Genesis 1–2 need not imply a validation of heterosexual relationships alone are not
convincing. Genesis 1 talks about male and female in connection with the fulfillment of God s purpose in
creation and the fruitfulness of humankind. Humanity’s blessing and proliferation though heterosexual
relationships is implied in the creation of male and female. The traditionalist document quotes Anglican biblical
scholar Gordon Wenham, writing on Genesis: “Here then we have a clear statement of the divine purpose of
marriage: positively, it is for the procreation of children; negatively, it is a rejection of the ancient oriental
fertility cults. 76 Genesis 2:24 is explicitly about heterosexual marriage: “Therefore a man leaves his father and
his mother and clings to his wife, and they become one flesh.  While “one flesh  may suggest more than their
sexual relationship, it hardly means less. Further, one reason why it is not good for the man to be alone is that
he cannot generate children. He needs help if he is to do so. Procreation is integral to marriage’s purpose, and
is the reason why marriage involves a man and a woman. So the centerpiece in the vision of human marriage
in Genesis is not intimacy, relationship, or romance, but family. The man and the woman will be the means and
context in which the family will grow so as to serve God and the land. This point in itself does not exclude
same-sex marriages, but it does not point to their being an equally valid option.
In Romans 1, sexual relationships between people of the same sex are an expression of human waywardness
and of the rejection of the truth, and a result of God’s wrath operating in the world. It is important to note
that Paul sees such relationships as a result of God’s wrath operating against sin in the world, not a cause of
that wrath. Heterosexual people are as much implicated in this waywardness (not least in our sexual
relationships) as people involved in same-sex relationships, which is reason for us to identify with our brothers
and sisters involved in same-sex relationships, not to repudiate or shame them.
First Corinthians 6:9–11 and 1 Timothy 1:10 offer lists of people who will not inherit the kingdom of God, lists
that include people involved in homosexual behavior and people who are greedy, rebellious, and guilty of
certain other sins. The lists do not look as if they are intended to be comprehensive and do not imply that a
distinctive shame attaches to that particular sin. Both passages use the term arsenokoitai, which denotes men
who lie with another man as with a woman. It echoes the proscription in Leviticus, and thus suggests that the
New Testament understands Leviticus to be proscribing a practice that was more than a matter of purity and
impurity. First Corinthians 6:9 also use the word malakoi, a term in Hellenistic Greek for someone who is the
passive partner in a same-sex relationship. The use of both terms undermines the argument that these
passages are especially concerned with pederasty.
On the basis of its study of such passages, the traditionalist argument in the report to the House of Bishops
concluded, “The one-flesh pattern of heterosexual marriage in Genesis was the background for the
descriptions of sinful behavior in the letters to Timothy, to the Corinthians, and to the Romans. Because
homosexual behavior was more common in the Greco-Roman world, there was a need to update and expand
the list of actions contrary to the Decalogue by including homosexual behavior along with theft, adultery, and
so on. 77 It would be more realistic to infer that the Scriptures’ perspective on this subject is limited than to
infer that our culture enables us to clarify its meaning as being open to affirming same-sex relationships.
Second, the question of mission and context. In the world as it was designed “from the beginning,  marriage
involved the lifelong commitment of one man and one woman as the context for raising a family. At least four
forms of relationship come one point short of that vision: polygamy; marriage that avoids having children;
marriage in which one person has a still-living divorced partner; and same-sex relationships.
To express the matter thus is not to imply that all of these four forms of relationship have the same theological
or ethical status, but I find it helpful to see that there is a partial analogy between them. Within my own
76

Quoted in John E. Goldingay, Grant R. LeMarquand, George R. Sumner, and Daniel A. Westberg, “Same-Sex Marriage and Anglican
Theology: A View from the Traditionalists,  Anglican Theological Review 93:1 (Winter 2011): 24–25.
77 “A View from the Traditionalists,  27.

Page 37 of 106

extended family and circle of friends are marriages that involve a partner whose former spouse is still living, a
marriage where the couple has avoided having children, people who are in same-sex relationships, and
someone who comes from a polygamous marriage. I would like to be able to seek God’s blessing on such
marriages and relationships, but I am unclear in what sense I can do so, as I could for the couple I described at
the beginning of this response to the essay.
Two of those four forms of union appear in Scripture; two do not. I find it helpful to look at the two that do
not appear in light of the way Scripture speaks of the two that do.
Jesus explicitly discusses divorce, and provides the helpful insight into the Torah that the Torah deals with
both the ideal world (how things were from the beginning) and how things are in the world we know, where
human hardness of heart is a reality. Deuteronomy’s acceptance of divorce belongs in the latter category.
Jesus does not bring a new standard of his own to the question, but affirms the visionary standard within the
Torah. Elsewhere, he describes the entirety of the Torah and the Prophets as an outworking of love for God
and love for one’s neighbor, and one can see how this description applies to the Deuteronomic rule that
presupposes divorce. Marriages do break down, and in a traditional society women may then be in an
especially vulnerable position. The rule about giving a woman divorce papers is an expression of love that
offers them some protection.
The Torah and the Prophets also acknowledge the practice of polygamy. They implicitly recognize problems
polygamy can solve; they certainly portray problems it can generate. They do not explicitly say that it stands
in tension with the creation vision for marriage, but this inference seems plausible. I can imagine Jesus taking
a similar view of polygamy to the one he takes of divorce.
The Bible does not refer to the committed, covenantal same-sex relationships that are presupposed by our
discussion of blessing such relationships, but I take them to have a similar status. They, too, do not correspond
to the creation ideal but reflect the reality of human hardness of heart. Paul’s comments in Romans encourage
us to think not so much in terms of the individual hardness of heart of the people involved in these
relationships, but of the hard-heartedness of humanity as a whole.
Considering these four issues together also helps us take into account the sociological and cultural factors
involved in our thinking about these relationships, to which the essay refers in the section on mission. On the
one hand, fifty years ago divorce was much less common than is now the case, and the Church did not marry
divorced people. (As a newly-ordained priest in England, I recall initiating the arrangement for a couple’s
wedding before it transpired that the divorced man was describing himself as a bachelor on the basis that he
was no longer married.) Twenty-five years ago, I blessed the marriage of a woman and a man who had been
divorced; in England, I could not have done so in a church, but I could in our seminary chapel (the woman is
now an archdeacon). In the twenty-first century, one of my own bishops has commented that she is hesitant
about approving a marriage for someone who has been twice-divorced, but she sometimes does so. A big
change in attitude and practice to divorce in the Church has come about not because we have studied
Scripture and the Church’s tradition more, but because of sociological and cultural factors. There are positive
and negative aspects to this development.
With regard to same-sex relationships, there are parallel sociological and cultural considerations. One is the
general sexualization of U.S. culture. Another is the collapse of the old family structures of which unattached
people could be a part (the study’s material on household is helpful in this connection). Related is the general
assumption that people will be involved in sexual activity, and the apparent quaintness of the idea that it
should not be so. Another is the ease with which people of same-sex attraction can engage in sexual activity
without thereby earning public disapproval. Another is the increasing legal recognition of same-sex
partnerships or marriage in Western countries. A further aspect of the cultural shift is the assumption that
marrying someone of the same sex is simply a matter of proper freedom and choice. There is no moral
Page 38 of 106

difference between the two forms of relationship. That view also seems obvious to many Christians, who then
add that neither is any theological difference involved.
Yet while same-sex relationships thus seem as “natural  to some people as heterosexual relationships seem,
the jury is still out on the scientific questions on same-sex relationships, as is noted in the study of “Biological
Mechanisms in Homosexuality: A Critical Review  in The Anglican Communion and Homosexuality.78 The essay’s
section on mission notes these cultural circumstances in which we take part in God’s mission, and in particular
the “shift in cultural perspectives  on sexuality. It can be read as implying that we must go along with the
cultural shift. Yet there surely can be cultural shifts that we do not go along with. The fact that there is a
cultural shift is a fact that we need to take into account, but our mission might be to confront it, not baptize
it. One way we might be able to get some perspective on cultural shifts and on our relationship to them is by
looking at ourselves from the perspective of people in other cultures, and particularly other churches. We
might note the analogy between the way many Western people are appalled by polygamy, while many people
in traditional societies are appalled by same-sex relationships or serial monogamy. It is particularly unfortunate
that we as a Church do not seek to look at ourselves from other perspectives in this way and can seem simply
to assume that we are the enlightened.
Nor does acceptance of same-sex relationships parallel the abolition of slavery, the proscribing of racism, the
elimination of woman’s subordination, or the acceptance of women’s ordination. In each of these areas, there
is material in Scripture that explicitly expresses what I have called God’s vision as well as material that makes
allowance for human hardness of heart. There is nothing in Scripture that expresses a vision for same-sex
relationships.
I close with a further adaptation of words from the traditionalist submission to the House of Bishops. The lack
of clarity concerning same-sex attraction on the part of biological and social scientists, the wounds in much of
the rest of the Anglican Communion caused by our unilateral action, and the apparent implications of Scripture
and the Church’s tradition all make it hard to see how the essay’s useful material on blessing can be applied to
same-sex relationships.
I appreciate the fact that the essay itself closes with a challenge concerning Christian unity and biblical
interpretation. I know priests who are afraid that the time will come when a bishop will withhold a license
from them if they are not prepared to bless same-sex relationships or (in due course) to conduct same-sex
marriages. It will be nice if the essay’s closing challenge will mean that people who do not accept the Church’s
new stance on same-sex relationships will not be excluded from its ministry.

c. Deirdre Good
Deirdre Good is professor of New Testament at The General Theological Seminary in New York City.

I thank the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music for their important reflections on the theological
resources of the Episcopal Church for same-sex relationships. My invited response simply indicates that I have
been, since my marriage to Julian Sheffield in 2008, in a different place. This description of our same-sex
marriage service is offered as a contribution to the discussion, as our Church moves toward what I hope will
be the recognition and use of a single marriage service for same-sex and different-sex couples.

78

David de Pomerai, “Biological Mechanisms in Homosexuality: A Critical Review  in Philip Groves, ed., The Anglican Communion and
Homosexuality: A Resource to Enable Listening and Dialogue (London: SPCK, 2008), 268–292.

Page 39 of 106

When we planned our wedding in 2008, it proved strikingly easy to modify a few single words in the Book of
Common Prayer’s Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage so that two persons of the same sex could administer
the sacrament to each other with integrity. Why this was the case is something that bears reflection.
First, the words.
The Book of Common Prayer has the celebrant declare at the outset, “Dearly beloved: We have come together
in the presence of God to witness and bless the joining together of this man and this woman in Holy
Matrimony.  Our wedding service substituted: “Dearly beloved: We have come together in the presence of
God to witness and bless the joining together of these women in Holy Matrimony. 
The Declaration of Consent is repeated without a change in language: “N., will you have this woman to be your
wife ... ? 
In the Ministry of the Word, the opening lines of the prayer change from “O gracious and everliving God, you
have created us male and female in your image: Look mercifully upon this man and this woman who come to
you seeking your blessing,  to “O gracious and everliving God, you have created us in your image: Look
mercifully upon these women who come to you seeking your blessing.  These changes render without
distortion the idea that humanity is created in God’s image and likeness (Genesis 1:26–27).
Following the vows, instead of the celebrant saying the words, “I now pronounce that they are husband and
wife,  our priest presiding said, “I now pronounce you married.  In our case, in a state that legalized same-sex
marriage, this recognized our relationship in both legal and religious spheres.
Second: the possible reasons.
Marriage realizes an order in creation. Here we join with those who state that Christianity is a “deeply material
religion,  regarding the “knowledge of God as mediated through ... creation. 79 The presence of God in the
world is made accessible in the central doctrine of the Incarnation by means of which God is known not simply
through experience of the physical world but one in which God becomes part of creation, being born as a
human being. Thus God can be known as a person directly. Christianity elevates the dignity of the human
person now made to be a participant with God in the safeguarding of the cosmos and in recognition of finitude.
As to the creation of humanity and the institution of marriage, we disagree that experience of male/female
sexual relations best interprets that order; we think instead that the order of creation is best known within
the sanctifying relation of Christ and the Church as ekklesia or community (Tyndale: congregation). This is to
say that we think the diversity of creation is realized and perfected in the community of Christ. Thus our
minimalist modification of the BCP’s Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage deemphasizes the male–female
or “complementarian  element of the marriage typology while stressing and amplifying the unitive and
egalitarian dimension of the Christological analogy or “mystery.  This functions to enhance what we have
come to recognize and understand as the implicit unitive elements of the service.
We believe marriage is a discipline. The discipline of marriage relies on the difficulty of living with another “in
prosperity and adversity  (BCP, 423), not to avoid our faults, but precisely to expose them—so that they can
be healed. Nor does the clause “when they hurt each other  included in the prayers (BCP, 429) confine itself
to minor slights. Since hurt and acknowledgment—sin and confession—are central to Christian growth and
the sacraments, this prayer sets their discipline in the theater of the whole fallen world. What matters in a
marriage is not whether the ministers of that marriage to each other are same- or differently-sexed; what
matters is that they were separate and they become united. The existing Prayer Book rite does an
extraordinarily good job of expressing that uniting for couples of whatever sexual orientation, setting them

79

Edward Norman, An Anglican Catechism (New York: Continuum, 2001), 15.

Page 40 of 106

on the path that will “make their life together a sign of Christ’s love to this sinful and broken world, that unity
may overcome estrangement, forgiveness heal guilt, and joy conquer despair  (BCP, 429).

d. Dora Rudo Mbuwayesango
Dora Rudo Mbuwayesango is the Iris and George E. Battle
Professor of Old Testament at Hood Theological Seminary in Salisbury, North Carolina.

I commend the members of the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music for their dedication and good work
in producing for the Church this much-needed resource for the blessing of same-sex relationships. Lesbians
and gays have always been accepted by God as part of God’s good creation and part of God’s redeemed
people, and I am glad that the Episcopal Church is now ready to recognize a dawning of the kingdom of God
in our time. The essay lays out well why we should have a liturgy for blessing same-sex relationships. The
following is my humble contribution to the furthering of the conversation that General Convention requested
of the Standing Commission.

III.1. The Church’s Call: A Focus on Mission
The place of blessings in the mission of the Church is well put: “The public affirmation of the blessing of a
covenantal relationship also sets that relationship apart for a sacred purpose: to bear witness to the creating,
redeeming, and sustaining love of God.  As “Faith, Hope, and Love  affirms in its preface, “Everything we do
as Christians is meant to express the Church’s call to participate in God’s own mission in the world.  The
missional character of blessing lies in the truth that one is blessed in order to serve.
While it is true that this missional understanding of blessing is located in Scripture, the passages given from
the Hebrew Bible do not seem to reflect that point. The witness from the book of Genesis seen in Abraham
(12:2b) and Jacob (28:14b) would need to be read through Galatians 3:8, where Paul interprets it to include the
extension of blessings to the Gentiles. In the context of Genesis there are two ways to understand these
verses. In the first place those other nations’ blessings was dependent on their treatment of either Abraham
or Jacob. Secondly, Abraham’s blessing extends beyond the individual in the sense of its extension to his direct
descendants (Gen. 15:12–21; 17:1–8). But passages like Micah 4:1–4 and Isaiah 2:2–4 better demonstrate this
missional understanding of blessing: God’s grace in elevating Jerusalem/Zion will result in the revelation of
God and in greater service to the other nations in the establishment of justice and peace among and within
the nations.
Worship and Mission: An Eschatological Vision. Worship equips for mission in the realization of the just reign of
God. Rites of blessing by the Church, of which the blessing of covenantal relationships is a part, equip couples
with the grace necessary to “make their life together a sign of Christ’s love to this sinful and broken world,
that unity may overcome estrangement, forgiveness heal guilt, and joy conquer despair  (BCP 429). The
Church’s vocation is in bringing up the just reign of God. And the just reign of God does not participate in the
unjust marginalization of segments of persons who are part of God’s creation.
Same-Sex Relationships and the Church’s Mission. It is a pity that the Church, in many ways, has been challenged
by culture instead of challenging culture in recognizing the humanity of lesbian and gay persons. In fact,
Christians have often stood, and in many ways continue to stand, in the way of granting human and civil rights
to this important segment of humanity. But I am glad that the Episcopal Church is finally striving to do what
the Spirit is leading it to do in affirming same-sex relationships. The many ways that same-sex relationships
contribute to the mission of the Church are well presented in this section. But I would like to point to one
aspect that has significance on the use of the marriage metaphor for the divine–human relationship. This
Page 41 of 106

metaphorical depiction of the divine–human relationship in the biblical texts (particularly in the prophets
Hosea, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel) is characterized by an association of divine love, compassion, commitment, and
reconciliation with divine wrath and punishment in the form of the rape and mutilation of women. Patriarchy’s
gender hierarchy and androcentric bias privileged male sexuality in a way that distorted human sexuality in
general. And when that metaphor is used to depict the divine–human bond, the image of that bond is also
distorted. Same-sex relationships have the potential to model mutuality in sexual relationships, which, in turn,
redeems the metaphor of sexual bond for the divine–human covenant relationship: the Church can then
celebrate and live up to its identity as the Bride of Christ.
The Challenge of God’s Blessings for Mission. A large part of Christ’s mission was to expand the horizon of the
kingdom of God. The suffering, death, and resurrection of Christ broke geographical and temporal boundaries.
During his ministry, Jesus did not limit himself to those who thought they belonged, but made it a point to
reach out to those whom others thought did not belong, and he was criticized for it. Jesus went beyond the
earlier, limited attempts to expand the horizons: “To the eunuchs who keep my sabbaths, who choose the
things that please me and hold fast my covenant, I will give ... an everlasting name that shall not be cut off.
And the foreigners who join themselves to the L ORD, to minister to him, to love the name of the L ORD, and to
be his servants ... —these I will bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer; their
burnt offerings and their sacrifices will be accepted on my altar; for my house shall be called a house of prayer
for all peoples  (Isaiah 56:4–7). Unlike the prophet Isaiah, who advocated for those ready on their own to
come, Jesus went out seeking them. Acts 10 shows us how the lessons from the past and the model of Jesus
does not make us immune to this shortcoming. But as history as shown us in the development of the Church’s
traditions, we need the Holy Spirit to continue to nudge us in the right direction every time God reveals a
segment of society overlooked and excluded from experiencing the abundance of God’s grace in the kingdom
of God.

III.2. The Church’s Joy: A Theology of Blessing
Same-sex blessings are now part of communal worship—they are outward and visible signs of God’s grace. I
would like to underscore the fact that “the grace and blessing of God already discerned in a couple’s
relationship does not thereby render a liturgical rite of blessing redundant.  As in the context of holiness
depicted in the Torah, God makes holy and the community enact holiness. In the case of holiness, humans do
rituals to enact the holiness established by God. So God and people mutually construct holiness—God declares
and people enact it through rites.
The extension of the blessing to all nations becomes much more evident in Christ. The references in the Old
Testament are problematic especially in Genesis 12:3 and much more limited in Isaiah 56 (see my comment
above). Paul’s interpretation of Genesis 12:3 makes the ultimate inclusion of all people that is evident in Jesus’
ministry and that of the early Church.
Indeed, “baptism and eucharist focus our attention on the particular blessings of the paschal mystery of
Christ’s death and resurrection.  And these blessings then “encourage us to discern the many other ways
God’s blessing is manifested in both creation and covenant.  We do not want to be blind to the potential
vehicles for blessings, especially the love and faithfulness of covenantal relationship. As one-sided, abusive,
and corrupt as marriage often was in ancient Israel, its focus on faithfulness nonetheless made it a suitable
metaphor for the divine–human covenant. In the Old Testament, the wife was considered the property of the
husband and thus the wife’s faithfulness to her husband was absolute, while the same was not required of the
husband. Faithfulness in love is what makes sexual bonds a vehicle for blessings.
I think one of the elements of God’s blessings that bears emphasis is the abundance of God’s blessing and
grace. I am glad that this is very much emphasized in the essay. I think not realizing that abundance was one
of the shortcomings of the religious leaders in Jesus’ day and continues to be manifested in our day. Jesus
Page 42 of 106

demonstrated the abundance of God’s blessings in his teachings and actions. In some ways Jesus himself
seems to have struggled with that reality, and it may have taken the Canaanite woman’s challenge—“Yes,
Lord, yet even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their masters’ table  (Matt. 15:27)—for Jesus to
acknowledge the abundance of God’s blessings.

III.3. The Church’s Life: Covenantal Relationship
Creation, Baptism, and Eucharist. The prophets do use marriage as a metaphor for the bond between God and
the people of Israel, but we should take note that most of those uses are tied to judgment. We should also
take into consideration the patriarchal nature of marriage that put women in a disadvantaged and subordinate
position to men, which is indicated in Ephesians 5:21–33. I believe that same-sex relationships help us to clearly
see and demonstrate mutuality in committed sexual relationships because acts of love are not gendered and
hierarchal.
Loving Our Neighbor as Ourselves. It is very important and insightful to recognize the concept of hospitality
that governed the accounts in Genesis 19 and Judges 19, which is the focus of these stories. Also, the stories
are about the gang rape of a male individual and not mutual sexual relationships between consenting
individuals. The gang rape of women is not acceptable since Lot’s daughters are divinely protected and the
rape of the Levite’s wife in Judges leads to civil war. Patriarchy and hetero-normativity govern how sexuality
is depicted in these narratives and in the biblical narratives as a whole. Hospitality should not be extended only
to some parts of humanity but to all humanity, whether female or male, heterosexual or homosexual, bisexual
or transgender. The model of hospitality in these narratives should be critiqued as inadequate. Hospitality
extended to all will result in the safety of all.
Called into Covenant. Covenants are lived in community and as Christians the Church is our community, and
thus bears witness to individual and communal covenants. The Church then “rightly celebrates these moments
of covenantal vocation  and calls us to live in households shaped by “deepening faithful intimacy. 
The Vocation of Households. I am appreciative of the attempt to tackle biblical passages that are obscure and
yet have been used to support heterosexuality, in opposition to same-sex sexuality. I would like to add that
the Bible’s construct of sexuality is limited by a concern for procreation and thus ignores all other sexual
expressions, whether they are heterosexual or non-heterosexual. In other words, what we have in the Bible is
not a definition of sexuality but procreation sexuality, and that makes it a very narrow and limited view of
sexuality.
Faithful Intimacy. We need to acknowledge the problems that are found in the biblical use of sexual intimacy
to reflect God’s relationship with humanity. In the Hebrew Bible, in particular, the metaphor is mostly used by
the prophets to depict Israel’s unfaithfulness and God’s judgment and punishment. God’s desire and love are
intricately tied to the “justified  abuse of the unfaithful wife. The sexual bond has to be untangled from its
connection to sexual abuse before it should be readily accepted as a positive metaphor for God’s love and
desire for God’s people. In the same way, the limitation of Genesis 1 and 2 have to be acknowledged when
these are taken as defining sexuality. The broad framework of Genesis 1 and 2 has to be accepted, and when
we see only the individuals in these texts we may be missing the point. Paul himself may be very wrong in
seeing individuals as being in the image of God. I would suggest that humanity as a whole is in the image of
God, and whatever our individual genders or sexualities, all of us together make the image of God. And
together we are fruitful.

III.4. The Church’s Challenge: Christian Unity and Biblical Interpretation
When we recite the Nicene Creed and the Apostles’ Creed in our liturgies we acknowledge the universal
Church. There are many elements of the human experience that make us disagree in certain areas of faith, and
while unity as a Church is of great value we should not hold on to that unity when it hinders the eschatological
Page 43 of 106

vision. The love of Christ compels us to seek justice for all humanity as we follow the model of Christ to love. I
think the fact that the Gospel of John depicts Jesus praying for the unity of his disciples (John 17:20–24) reflects
the difficulty of forging and maintaining that unity in an imperfect world. As we strive for that unity, we should
not lose focus on God’s mission and our mission in the world.

Concluding Wish
It is my hope that subsequent editions of the rites for the blessing of same-sex relationships will not seem to
reflect that they are inferior to different-sex relationships. I also hope that our limited understanding of the
blessedness of same-sex relationships will deepen and expand, and will no longer be as dependent on our
understanding of different-sex or heterosexual marriage.

e. George R. Sumner
George R. Sumner was the Principal at Wycliffe College in Toronto.
On May 16, 2015, he was elected Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Dallas.

I have been requested to respond to the document called “Faith, Hope, and Love: Theological Resources for
Blessing Same-Sex Relationships.  This is actually not the first time I have been asked by the Episcopal Church
to weigh in on this subject. I was a traditionalist member of the House of Bishops’ Theology Committee, which
met over two years and at considerable expense to the Church, beginning in 2008. Our group was a congenial
and generous-spirited one, and we presented both sides of the theology of marriage in relation to same-sex
relations, along with rebuttals of the opposing team’s claims. Our work was presented to the House of
Bishops, and eventually published in the Anglican Theological Review in the Winter 2011 issue. Our document
did not receive any mention in the introduction to “Faith, Hope, and Love,  though it is cited in a footnote in
the last section, on Christian unity. Apparently the Church has moved beyond the point where two points of
view need to be represented in official reflection on this issue. I will not attempt to summarize all our points
in this short piece, since anyone interested can find the complete essays at the Anglican Theological Review
website. As for the more recent document, it is an articulate presentation of the progressive position, but
does not break any new ground. It will reinforce the views of those who agree, but offers little of interest for
those who do not.
As to the prior committee of which I was a part, after two years of work, it was clear to most of us that the
matter came down to culture. The revisionist case cannot be made from the Bible, tradition, or science, and
there were moments of candor on this score from the progressive side. Is the new trend a wind of the Spirit,
or not? Can the stool in question stand on that one leg? I am by trade a missiologist, and so it was interesting
for me to note how the tag missio Dei was deployed to bolster the progressive argument. It was claimed that
what God is now doing in the world trumped all other evidence. But some historical study around the concept
of the missio tag reveals the tendency we humans have to conflate the trajectory of God’s work in the world
with our own political predilections, when our perception is unaided by Scripture and tradition.
As to the politics of the moment, conservative Episcopalians are in an awkward position. Even as these
resources for same-sex blessing rites are being appropriated by the Church, consideration of marriage itself
has begun. There is a strong suggestion that a proposed change to the rite of marriage cannot be far behind.
I believe that the move to bless same-sex unions was a mistake, but I also believe that proceeding on to
marriage, and ensconcing the change in the Book of Common Prayer, would exacerbate the problem. That
move would enflame the conflict further, especially in the Anglican Communion. It would threaten to move
the new liturgical practice from option to coercion. It would put at risk the credibility of liberal leaders who
Page 44 of 106

told their flocks they only supported blessings. It would show a lack of the patience which is implied in the
idea of doctrinal reception. It would fail to hear the voice of wisdom saying “enough is enough. 
If the Church is not really interested in hearing from conservative theologians like me on this issue, what am I
to do with the remainder of my airtime? The truly pressing issue before the Church is the following: Will room
be found for the loyal opposition, for conservative Episcopalians? Is our Church to be truly liberal, and will it
live up to the claim it makes about its own comprehensiveness? After all our talk about “the other  nowadays,
what will liberal Episcopalians do with the fact that “the other  is in many cases a traditional Evangelical or
Anglo-Catholic or charismatic? Years ago, at an event for Episcopal Foundation fellows, my friend Paul Zahl
said that the great ethical challenge for those in power in the national Church now is how to deal with its
relatively powerless conservative minority. This question is yet more urgent when that minority also happens
to have the weight of the tradition and the strongest bonds of affection with the wider Communion on its
side.
I was taught in my seminary days about F. D. Maurice’s vision of a kind of liberal Anglicanism that needed all
its parties, each one challenging the other like flint. I have my own issues with Maurice, but surely he was the
forerunner of modern Anglicanism. Is there the will, not to mention the theological virtues of faith, hope, and
love, on the part of the majority, to live out this vision? Will the Church encourage that freedom of theological
expression which we are proud of in the breadth of our tradition? Do we mean it when we talk about the value
of conscience in our Anglican tradition, especially for dioceses and parishes in the coming years? In this vein,
is the Church willing to guarantee them access to the traditional rite of marriage, come what may, as a
concrete step toward assuring a real comprehensiveness? I was, I assume, asked to respond to this document
as a gesture of inclusion, and so it is the question of real and costly inclusion that I wish to bring before the
Church.

f. Fredrica Harris Thompsett
Fredrica Harris Thompsett is the Mary Wolfe Professor Emerita of Historical Theology
at the Episcopal Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts

I do remember my baptism. I was an eight-year-old Episcopalian and fascinated by the strong promises made
in my behalf. The minister used the office for children, yet we—my twin brother and I—kept adding in the “I
will’s  and “I do’s.  The promise that we might be granted the “power and strength  to “triumph against the
devil, the world, and the flesh  (1928 BCP, 278) was, to say the least, unforgettable to my young mind. This
was strong stuff, well worthy of the joyous family celebration that followed.
Recently the modern liturgical renewal movement has strengthened and brought Holy Baptism into greater
visibility across many denominations. For Episcopalians these positive revisions in Holy Baptism are
represented in the 1979 Book of Common Prayer. Today there are more occasions for congregations to
celebrate Holy Baptism and together commit and recommit themselves to the challenges conveyed in the
Baptismal Covenant. This liturgical shift has restored baptism’s prominence in shaping our religious identity
both as individuals and as worshiping communities. As a theologian and historian, I know that these changes
in contemporary liturgies of baptism not only restore early Christian practices, they also align with distinct
Anglican theological emphases.
Baptism is foundational. When I reflect theologically on how God is working today in our relationships and
faithful living, I am drawn again and again to consider promises made and reaffirmed in baptism. Of particular
importance in baptism and other sacraments is the generosity of God’s covenantal love. Today’s celebrations
Page 45 of 106

of baptism move us liturgically closer to glimpsing and understanding covenanting partnerships. Moreover, in
our experience of promises publicly made in gathered community, we are affirming and welcoming individual
lifetimes of godly living. We are moving away from worship patterns that unintentionally privatized and
obscured the fact of God’s great goodness in creation. In blessing lifelong relationships we are also, I believe,
representing significant aspects of our Anglican heritage. Both in traditional marriage rites and in the proposed
blessing of committed relationships of same-sex couples, the characteristics I first encountered as an eightyear-old child have been strengthened and extended.
For some Episcopalians the impetus to respond to our sisters and brothers who are gay and lesbian by
providing ways to bless same-sex couples is primarily occasioned by secular cultural changes and has little to
do with theological understandings. In this brief essay I wish to point to the theological continuity of our
baptismal practices with the current call to reflect on how God is working today in committed same-sex
relationships. In effect, the patterns of worship our Prayer Book prescribes have strengthened understanding
of committed lifelong relationships. Three overlapping theological components are central both to baptism
and to blessing same-sex unions. These are: (1) deepened insight into our covenantal relationship with God in
Christ; (2) the public character and value of individuals and congregations sharing God’s blessings; and (3)
continuity with positive Anglican perspectives on committed intimate relationships.
Like most biblical covenants, the Baptismal Covenant is deeply grounded in the generosity of God’s love. Our
Hebraic ancestors, whether in the covenants of Noah, Abraham and Sarah, Moses, or Jeremiah, emphasized
the steadfast loving-kindness of the Creator. The Hebrew word hesed is frequently used in these biblical texts.
It is usually translated as “loving-kindness  and associated as a sure and steadfast foundation for covenantal
living. There is nothing simple or short-lived about covenantal love. The foundation for covenantal theology is
the expectant love and uncompromising faithfulness that God holds for God’s people for generations to come.
Our biblical ancestors emphasized the magnitude of God’s empowering action, call, and summons into lifelong
relationship. Biblical expressions of covenant thinking today are central for those of us who wish to be
addressed by God and respond to God’s presence in our lives.
Over the past thirty-five years, guided by the 1979 Book of Common Prayer, Episcopalians have become more
familiar with the concept of covenantal relationships with God. This is underscored educationally in the Outline
of the Faith, which describes a covenant as “a relationship initiated by God, to which a body of people
responds in faith  (BCP, 846). It is underscored liturgically in the Baptismal Covenant (BCP, 304–305). Baptism
is an expression of a sacramental covenant in which we are adopted, that is chosen, as God’s own children and
incorporated into full membership in Christ’s Church. In the Synoptic Gospels’ telling of our Lord’s baptism,
Jesus is proclaimed as God’s “Son, the Beloved,  with whom God is “well pleased  (Matthew 3:17, Mark 1:11,
Luke 3:22b). In our baptism we too are adopted as God’s “own children  and “marked as Christ’s own for
ever  (BCP, 311, 308). Baptism reveals God’s generosity in creation, God’s steadfast loving-kindness. God’s
gracious gift of baptism incorporates and extends our lives into God’s mission. In contemporary worship
experiences we have moved closer, as in marriage and same-sex blessings, to glimpsing and proclaiming the
blessing of covenanting relationships.
Baptism is not simply or only an individual decision. As a covenant, this sacrament is about God acting and the
community of faith responding. Therefore the service of Holy Baptism is more than a private family matter,
and it is designed for public occasions. Even as baptism has been restored in the 1979 Book of Common Prayer
to a joyous place of graceful prominence in Episcopal worship, so too blessing of same-sex relationships offers
an opportunity for public expression of God’s abundant grace and goodness. Some same-sex couples, their
family, friends, and other community members may experience restoration, healing, and forgiveness. Blessing
services signal acceptance, affirmation, commitment, and ongoing support from God, from the Church, and
from gathered family and friends. For those whose intimate relationships may have in the past been hidden,
despised, shunned, ignored, or dismissed, the promise of new life in Christ is liberating. I am reminded of the
Page 46 of 106

freedom from cultural and social barriers promised by Paul in Galatians 3:27–28: “As many of you as were
baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ. There is no longer Jew or Greek, there is now no
longer slave or free, there is no longer male and female; for all of you are one in Christ Jesus.  Paul envisioned
baptism as overcoming all that separates human beings from one another and from God. God’s promise of
freedom and shared life in Christ replaces all prior identities and divisions.
In my experience the public character of blessing same-sex unions provides opportunities for pastoral witness
and reconciliation. I remember experiencing with joyful tears a blessing service held for a couple who had
been faithfully committed to one another for more than fifty years. They were described by others as “pillars
of our congregation.  Over the years their many gifts of service and stewardship had been welcomed, yet
their loving, lifelong, committed relationship had not previously been even acknowledged, let alone blessed.
For my homosexual sisters and brothers the public assurance of God’s presence and affirmation of their most
intimate relationships has been a long time coming.
Anglican perspectives on committed intimate relationships have traditionally emphasized the loving relational
character of matrimony. Early on in the Reformation our Episcopal ancestors were among the first modern
Christians to put a loving spin on marriage. Thomas Cranmer, an Archbishop of Canterbury and the primary
author of the earliest editions of the English Book of Common Prayer, crafted a liturgy which underscored
marriage as a positive opportunity for mutual enjoyment. Cranmer—himself a happily, if quietly, married man
with children—emphasized the benefit of marriage for England’s citizens. Marriage was, he said in the 1549
Form of the Solemnization of Matrimony, for the “mutual society, help, and comfort, that the one ought to
have of the other, both in prosperity and adversity.  Perhaps with his own “dearly beloved Margaret Cranmer 
in mind, it was Cranmer who was the first to add to the official Church of England marriage text the promise
that each partner would “love and cherish  the other. These words replaced the wife’s required oath in a late
medieval service to be “buxom in bed and board.  Archbishop Cranmer’s perspective on committed loving
relationships benefited the couple, the Church, and the wider society. In the shifting context of the English
Reformation, Cranmer seized opportunities for significant liturgical, theological, and social change. These
were expressed in the new English Book of Common Prayer. In worship and common prayer, cultural attitudes
and expectations for married couples were shaped anew.
What I suggest here is that liturgical resources for blessing same-sex relationships have much in common with
positive Anglican perspectives on loving and faithful relationships. Archbishop Cranmer recognized marriage
as a vital social institution grounded in ideals of mutuality, help, and comfort. The trajectory from a sixteenthcentury archbishop to an early twenty-first-century Chief Justice of Massachusetts is slim at best. Yet it might
be of interest to note that in the 2003 ruling that allowed Massachusetts to become the first state to issue
marriage licenses to same-sex couples, Chief Justice Margaret Marshall argued that neither Church nor society
should hoard the values bestowed in marriage or take their wider societal beneficial intent for granted.80
Marshall, herself a practicing Episcopalian, argued that this ruling affirmed “the dignity and equality of all
individuals.  Could it be that she was influenced by the Baptismal Covenant’s promise to “respect the dignity
of every human being  (BCP, 305)? Could it be that common prayer has had a steadily progressive impact
influencing both individual hearts and societal laws?
I am on firmer, far less conjectural, theological ground in naming Incarnational theology as a central aspect of
Anglican theology. In Anglican theology the legacy of the Incarnation has become a cherished focal point, a
guiding principle shaping Anglican understandings of human and divinity alike. Michael Ramsey, who many
80

The landmark ruling “Goodridge vs. the Department of Health,  was decided by the State Appellate Court in November of 2003
and became law in May of 2004. It has withstood attempts to replace the word “marriage  with less embracing matrimonial
terminology like “civil unions.  In November of 2009, Episcopal Bishop M. Thomas Shaw, following a permissive (though not
obligatory) action of General Convention for bishops in states which legally allow same-sex marriage, permitted clergy in the Diocese
of Massachusetts to officiate at same-sex weddings.

Page 47 of 106

may remember as one of the great Archbishops of Canterbury of the twentieth century, concluded that “the
Incarnation meant not only that God took human flesh but that human nature was raised up to share in the
life of God. 81 The redemptive work of the Incarnation provides the foundation for Anglican optimism about
humanity. This God not only creates but also restores the dignity of human nature. This God in Christ partakes
of the fullness of human life. This God bears the full range of love’s power, including the capacity to instill and
invite devotion, passion, affection, and sexuality expressed in our most intimate relationships. Biblical scholar
and Anglican theologian L. William Countryman has noted that baptism interprets the goodness of the gifts
bestowed by God in creation.82 The blessing of covenanted couples, whether same-sex or different-sex
partners, reminds us of the worth of intimate human relationships established by God in creation. In the
blessing of covenanted couples and in marriage rites the goodness of faithful sexual intimacy is affirmed.
Incarnational theology and baptismal theology alike proclaim that, in Jesus, God is with us in a new way.
Similarly, in marriage, as in the blessing of covenanted couples, the newness of life in Christ is affirmed by both
the couple and the wider community.
I have emphasized the theological grounding that the sacrament of Holy Baptism offers for other expressions
of covenantal love. It might not be a stretch to recall and adapt a saying articulated forty years ago when the
Episcopal Church was debating the ordination of women: “If you are not going to ordain women, stop
baptizing them.  Anglican theologian Marilyn McCord Adams commends this saying as “forwarding a strong
doctrine of baptism.  She contends, as I do, that “the strong doctrine of baptism is radical and bears
repeating. 83 When considering the opportunity to bless covenanted same-sex couples, a similar baptismallygrounded axiom might be: “If we are not open to blessing committed relationships of same-sex couples, we
should stop baptizing them.  The covenant of baptism offers a lifelong foundation for deepening other
covenanted relationships of love and service to God’s reconciling mission. Anglican Christians are known for
finding integrity and coherence in the ways our patterns of worship shape our beliefs. As the theological
resources in “I Will Bless You, and You Will Be a Blessing  indicate, promises affirmed by baptism shape an
encouraging framework for blessing faithful relationships of covenanted love.

81

On the centrality of the Incarnation in Ramsey’s theology see Kenneth Leech, “‘The Real Archbishop’: A Profile of Michael
Ramsey,  The Christian Century (March 12, 1986): 266–69.
82 See L. William Countryman, Living on the Border of the Holy: Renewing the Priesthood of All (Harrisburg: Morehouse Publishing),
especially chapter 5, 81-110,
83 See Marilyn McCord Adams, “The Ordination of Women: Some Theological Implications,  in Looking Forward, Looking Backward:
Forty Years of Women’s Ordination, ed. Fredrica Harris Thompsett (New York: Morehouse Publishing, 2014), 72–73.

Page 48 of 106

III. HEARING, SEEING, AND
DECLARING NEW THINGS
Pastoral Resources for Preparing Couples
for a Liturgy of Blessing
prepared by
The Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music, 2009-2012, 2012-2015

Contents
Overview: Pastoral Care for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
1. Available Resources: Materials for Pastoral Preparation
2. Particular Issues Affecting Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
3. Presenters
4. Outline of Pre-Blessing Preparation for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
Handouts
1. Theological Reflection on Covenantal Relationship: Spiritual Practice for
Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
2. Declaration of Intention for Lifelong Covenant
3. About Presenters—For the Couple
4. Information for Presenters
5. Model Congregational Guidelines

Page 49 of 106

Overview: Pastoral Care for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
You have heard; now see all this; and will you not declare it? From this time
forward I make you hear new things, hidden things that you have not known.
—Isaiah 48:6
I will give you as a light to the nations,
that my salvation may reach to the end of the earth.
—Isaiah 49:6

The pastoral resources in this essay are provided to assist clergy and trained lay people who are preparing
gender and sexual minority84 couples for a blessing of their relationship, using “The Witnessing and Blessing
of a Lifelong Covenant.  For couples preparing for a blessing, the expectation of such preparation is equivalent
to the canonical requirement that couples preparing for marriage receive instruction “in the nature, purpose,
and meaning, as well as the rights, duties and responsibilities of marriage  (Canon I.18.3[c]).
Preparation is similar for all couples, whether gender and sexual minority or different-sex/gender. Most clergy
and lay people who currently offer premarital preparation to different-sex couples are more than capable of
working with gender and sexual minority couples. However, understanding the differences is necessary—and
helpful.
The pastoral resources described in this essay address differences in the preparation of gender and sexual
minority couples and different-sex couples and include some of the available resources for preparing gender
and sexual minority couples for the blessing of their relationship.

Commonly Used Terms for Gender and/or Sexual Minorities
Because human sexuality exists on a spectrum, because the number of possible identities that communities
or individuals may craft (consciously and unconsciously) defies limitation, and because language constantly
evolves, terminology for gender and sexual minorities (GSM) sometimes proves elusive. As a general
consideration, it is always best to refer to someone by name, not a category, and to ask people how they
identify themselves or prefer to be called. It is not as important that the preparer fully understand the
complexities of identity and/or orientation as that the couple themselves do; however, clergy and lay
preparers are encouraged to read some of the excellent resources available about GSM experiences or to
consult with a professional.
The Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD)—an organization that advises media and other
organizations concerning the language and images they use to represent GSM people and issues—provides
extensive, widely used, and highly readable reference guides for commonly used terminology. Some common
terms are described below with reference to the glossary available at glaad.org. For a more comprehensive
consideration, you may also wish to consult An Ally’s Guide to Terminology: Talking About LGBT People &
Equality, published by GLAAD.
Sex: The biological condition of being male or female is typically identified visually at birth based on
visible anatomy of the newborn. However, for a variety of reasons the sex of a person cannot always
be definitively determined from visual assessment. While sex differences are biological, biology is

84

The term “gender and sexual minorities  (GSM) is increasingly used in academic study of gender/sexual identity and/or orientation,
recognizing the complexity of both human biology and the social construction of gender and sexuality. This term is used in this
pastoral resource except when referring to marriage, since “same-sex marriage  is commonly used in civil law.

Page 50 of 106

flexible, dynamic, and not unaffected by environment and culture. Furthermore, it is important to bear
in mind that biology does not determine identity.
Gender Identity and Expression: Individuals usually have a stable, deep, and strongly felt sense of their
own gender that manifests very early in childhood; that gender identity, however, may not always
correspond to the person’s sex. A person whose gender identity does not correspond with the sex
assigned at birth may be called a transgender person (though individuals sometimes use or prefer
other language). The GLAAD “Media Reference Guide—Transgender Issues  describes transgender as
“an umbrella term for people whose gender identity and/or gender expression differs from what is
typically associated with the sex they were assigned at birth. 85 Transgender people who, through
surgery and/or hormone treatment, alter their biological sex to align with their gender identity are
sometimes called transsexual, though the term is not preferred by all. It should be noted, however,
that not all transgender people are able or wish to medically alter their biological sex.
A person’s internal gender identity may or may not be expressed to society. Gender expression refers
to how an individual manifests gender to society, including “one’s name, pronouns, clothing, haircut,
behavior, voice, or body characteristics. 86 Societies typically associate these characteristics with
masculinity and femininity; however, the associations vary from culture to culture. Transgender people
often express the gender with which they internally identify in ways that their society will recognize;
others, though, both transgender and cisgender (a term used to describe non-transgender people),
develop expressions that are intentionally gender non-conforming.
While many people understand themselves as being a man or a woman, others identify themselves in
ways that are not limited by this traditional binary. Sometimes those who resist or reject the traditional
gender categories identify themselves as “genderqueer  (though this term is not universal). 87
Sexual Orientation: Although they are often associated with each other, gender identity and sexual
orientation do not have a direct correspondence. For instance, a transgender man88 (someone who
was assigned the female sex at birth, but identifies as a man) who is sexually drawn to women is
considered “straight. 
Rather than “homosexual,  which carries offensive, negative connotations for many, the preferred
term for someone “whose enduring physical, romantic and/or emotional attractions are to people of
the same sex 89 is “gay  or “gay person.  Some women prefer to use the term “lesbian  while others
prefer “gay woman.  A person whose sexual orientation encompasses people of both the same and
different sex are generally called “bisexual  or “bi.  Despite common assumptions to the contrary,
“[b]isexual people need not have had specific sexual experiences to be bisexual; in fact, they need not
have had any sexual experience at all to identify as bisexual. 90 A significant number of gay, lesbian,
and bi people have adopted the formerly offensive term “queer  to describe themselves or GSM
people more generally; however, the term continues to be offensive to others and should not be used
to describe someone unless they express an explicit preference for it.

85

http://glaad.org/reference/transgender.
http://glaad.org/reference/transgender.
87 For stories of transgender Episcopalians, see “Voices of Witness: Out of the Box,  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v
=QzCANWGsEdc.
88 While some transgender people do describe themselves as a “transgender man/woman  others prefer the language man/woman
without the modifier. Still others resist the gender binary altogether. Because individual perceptions and preferences vary, it is best
not to assign a category (or a pronoun) to someone without asking how they understand and prefer to talk about their own gender
identity.
89 http://www.glaad.org/reference/lgb.
90 http://www.glaad.org/reference/lgb
86

Page 51 of 106

Contextual Competence
Clergy and qualified lay people preparing couples for blessings need to be contextually competent, a concept
derived from cultural competence. In fields such as health care, social work, and education, culturally
competent professionals embody awareness, a positive attitude, knowledge, and skills that enable them to
work effectively in cross-cultural situations.
Consider the different situations that one might encounter when preparing a couple for a blessing:
•

Preparing a couple in their seventies for a blessing of their relationship is very different from
preparing a couple in their twenties.

•

Preparing a couple entering a new relationship is different from preparing two people who have
been living in a committed relationship for a long time.

•

Preparing an interracial couple differs in some aspects from preparing a couple of the same race.

•

Preparing a couple without children differs from preparing parents.

Being “contextually competent  means understanding and appreciating these, and many more, differing
situations. Clergy and trained lay preparers need to examine their own contextual competence as they
consider working with GSM couples. If they cannot work with a GSM couple with appreciation and awareness,
then the best practice is to refer the couple to another clergyperson or trained lay preparer, and seek further
training for themselves.
The materials below will help clergy and trained lay preparers adapt their skills to work with GSM couples in a
contextually competent manner.

1. Available Resources: Materials for Pastoral Preparation
In a 2010 churchwide survey regarding pastoral and teaching materials, the Standing Commission on Liturgy
and Music found that the following resources are among those commonly used to prepare GSM couples for a
blessing.

Prepare/Enrich (Life Innovations, Inc.)
https://www.prepare-enrich.com
•

A relationship inventory that assesses couples’ strengths and growth areas on topics such as
finances, communication, conflict resolution, and sexuality. This assessment tool is by far the one
used most frequently among respondents to the Commission’s survey. “Facilitators  (the term
that Prepare/Enrich employs) must be trained in its use; see website for cost of materials.

•

Positives: recently revised (2008), customized version easily used with GSM couples; uses the
language of “partner ; most comprehensive tool to address personality, conflict resolution,
family, health, and financial and spiritual issues; assesses goals, strengths, and growth areas;
large, national norm base (more than five hundred thousand couples).

•

Negatives: currently, research results are standardized only for different-sex/gender couples, so
there is no “norm  against which to compare a GSM couple’s data.

Premarriage Awareness Inventory (Logos Productions)
https://premarriageawareness.com
•

Preferred by those not trained in Prepare/Enrich.

Page 52 of 106

•

Positives: three customized formats, including inventories for those living together or previously
married; thorough personality assessment; coverage of major areas, such as faith, finances,
family of origin, children, power issues, life goals.

•

Negatives: standardized for different-sex/gender couples only, but author indicates that he will
be implementing a GSM version (no target date given).

The Marriage Journey: Preparation and Provisions for Life Together,
by Linda Grenz and Delbert Glover (Church Publishing, 2003)
•

Recommended by those who find online inventories impersonal.

•

Positives: Uses “partner  instead of specifying gender; includes material for couples living
together and those with children; clear, direct language; ideal for the technologically challenged
couple.

•

Negatives: no personality assessment included.

The following books were published too recently to be cited by respondents to the 2010 survey. Because they
specifically address pastoral needs of same-sex couples, we include them among available resources.
•

All Whom God Has Joined: Resources for Clergy and Same-Gender Loving Couples
by Leanne McCall Tigert and Maren C. Tirabassi (Pilgrim Press, 2010).

•

Premarital Counseling for Gays and Lesbians: Case Studies and Helpful Questions
by Pamela Milam (ASD Publishing, 2012).

2. Particular Issues Affecting Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
Issues or differences that are particular to gender and sexual minority (GSM) couples are not necessarily
challenges in preparation. They are more often gifts, especially if the clergyperson or layperson preparing a
couple understands variation as part of God’s plan for the world and a sign of God’s blessing. Contextual
competence is important here, especially in a preparer’s awareness of places where skills for preparing
different-sex/gender couples do not transfer to GSM couples. In addition, preparers need to examine their
own understanding of blessing a GSM couple, as well as the assumptions of the couple’s faith and civil
communities, including diocesan authority and various state laws.
GSM couples come to ask for a blessing with a variety of life backgrounds; thus provision for some variations
and differences appear, for example, in the prayer choices in the liturgy. Other variations that clergy or lay
preparers will meet in their work with GSM couples follow below.91

Canon Law and Diocesan Policies
Canon I.18.1 requires clergy to “conform to the laws of the State governing the creation of the civil status of
marriage.  With the U.S. Supreme Court ruling issued on June 26, 2015, GSM couples may be married in any
U.S. jurisdiction. In dioceses outside the United States, civil law varies, and clergy must familiarize themselves
with the law applicable in their context.
General Convention Resolution 2015-A054 authorizes the use of “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong
Covenant  for use “under the direction and with the permission of the bishop exercising ecclesiastical
authority.  This liturgy is intended for use with GSM couples in jurisdictions where the marriage of same-sex
91

This material is adapted from “Pastoral Resources for Province One Episcopal Clergy Ministering to Same-Gender Couples. 

Page 53 of 106

couples is not legal. Clergy and couples seeking a blessing must follow the policies or guidelines of their
diocese.
Canon I.19.3 sets out requirements that must be followed in cases of remarriage after divorce or dissolution
of a marriage. Because some dioceses require professional counseling for a couple if one member of the
couple (or both) has been divorced more than once or has had more than one previous long-term relationship,
clergy should check with the diocesan office for guidance on what is expected in such situations.
For clergy who feel they cannot confer a liturgical blessing for any GSM couple, the best practice is to refer
the couple to another clergyperson. Some of these clergy may also wish to provide an additional pastoral
response to those couples, thereby affirming and supporting their desire for God’s blessing upon their
relationship.
Currently, very few denominations authorize their clergy to conduct same-sex blessings, so an Episcopal
clergyperson may be approached by a couple seeking a blessing of their union simply because it is not an
option for them within their own denomination. Episcopal clergy may expect that some of these couples from
other denominations feel tender and vulnerable in their relationship to the wider Church and so may need
particular nurture and support.

Possible Issues Arising from Sexual Orientation or Gender Identity
This section addresses some of the more common issues that may arise in the process of preparing a GSM
couple for a blessing of their lifelong covenant.
“Late bloomers  who “come out  later in life: Some GSM people recognize their sexual orientation or gender
identity from a very young age. Others may have a growing realization that does not become fully clear until
much later in life; some may have understood their sexual orientation or gender identity for some time but
are only recently “coming out  publicly. A “late bloomer  may need some time to begin to live into his/her
truest life or explore with a counselor this core change in self-perception before entering into a lifelong
commitment.
Previous relationships: Some individuals may have lived a heterosexual life to a point, perhaps inwardly
questioning their sexual orientation or gender identity, before deciding that they felt more strongly toward
people of the same sex or gender; others may have simply fallen in love with someone of the same sex or
gender, perhaps by surprise. Still others may have accepted their own bisexuality and at one point decided to
make a commitment to a person of a different sex/gender. These earlier relationships may have been more or
less satisfactory depending on the extent to which familial, societal, and/or religious expectations played a
part, and the compatibility between the partners. There are likely to be many important relationships from
these earlier partnerships which will need to be honored and successfully incorporated into the life of the new
couple.
Internalized homophobia: One or both members of a GSM couple may have been subjected to a continual
societal onslaught of negative or stereotypical messages. These messages may have been internalized,
possibly resulting in a person growing severely uncomfortable with his/her sexual orientation or gender
identity. A clergyperson or trained lay preparer who perceives that a person has significant negative feelings
or stigma about his/her orientation may appropriately refer the person for counseling with a therapist trained
to handle this issue.
Biphobia: Bisexuality is sometimes unfairly and inaccurately associated with promiscuity and infidelity. This
prejudice is found among people of varying sexual orientations, including other GSM people. Bi people are not
more or less inclined to sexual license than any other people; clergy and lay preparers should guard against
making assumptions about bisexuals.

Page 54 of 106

Long-Term Relationships
Preparers may be working with people who have been together for many years or have previously had longterm, monogamous relationships. This means that preparers must be open to learning and benefiting from
the wisdom generated by a couple’s long years together.

Particular Hurt
One or both members of a GSM couple may have been wounded by exclusion or marginalization, that is,
experiences and feelings of being “other  or “less than.  Certainly, GSM people are at risk of being victims of
abuse or exploitation, as well as self-hatred and fear of rejection. Clergy and laypeople preparing GSM couples
for blessings need to be sensitive to these issues.
Very often, due to prior experiences with organized religions who reject and do not approve of GSM people
or relationships, these individuals do not feel welcome in a house of worship. In addition, one or both members
of the couple may have a history of being excluded from benefits that heterosexuals receive from the State.
For the couple, a clergyperson or layperson providing blessing preparation represents the Church, so a
preparer will need to build a trusting relationship with the couple in order to support them in dealing with the
anger, hurt, or confusion that erupts from rejection.

In or Out?
Although a couple is seeking a public union, one or even both members of the couple may need to remain
“closeted  in some aspects of their individual lives. For instance, one person may be employed in a workplace
or profession where being “out  could jeopardize the ability to function there at top form or even to continue
to work there. Unfortunately, a prime example is the Church. For GSM clergy in many denominations, “coming
out,  especially when in a relationship, can result in being stripped of the ability to function as ordained clergy
or to hold any position of leadership in the Church. In secular places of employment, where GSM people might
be protected by law, their sexual orientation or gender identity could affect their ability to be hired or result
in a tense and unfriendly work environment. Being “out  could have a negative impact on seeking or
maintaining a position in public office. Lesbians and gays serving in the military no longer need to remain
closeted, but many who were in the military previous to this change might need to talk about their pasts as
closeted members of the armed services.
GSM couples take risks, even to their lives, when they display affection in public; when they cannot hold hands,
they hold secrets. Because of this, there can be tension in a relationship when one person is fully “out  and
comfortable with some public, visible displays of affection while the other is not. In some work situations, one
person in the relationship may need to be careful when calling a partner at the workplace or taking messages
at home.
Couples need to discuss when, where, and with whom it is safe to be open about their relationship in general.
Specifically, as part of their preparation, they need to discuss each other’s comfort levels and needs regarding
making their relationship known in a public ceremony.

Relational History and Resolution of Previous Relationships
All couples have to deal with what went before. GSM couples may not be going through legal divorces, but as
with any relationship, they will still likely need to process issues related to their previous relationships on an
emotional and practical level. Couples will be freer to proceed into a new lifelong committed relationship when
they have processed what one or the other has learned from earlier relationships and when they have resolved
matters of finance, property, child custody, and responsibility to former spouses or partners.

Page 55 of 106

Families of Origin
Most clergy and trained laypersons inquire about each individual’s family of origin when preparing differentsex/gender couples for marriage. The answers can give the couple insights regarding a number of issues,
including their understanding of what a healthy or unhealthy relationship looks like and their attitudes toward
finances and parenting practices; the responses may also enable couples to identify unresolved issues that
could affect the relationship.
One area which may be unique to GSM couples is their families’ responses to their orientation, their public
lives as GSM people, and their life together as a couple. Couples will benefit from exploring questions such as:
Have the individuals “come out  to their own families? If so, what was the response? Has either member of a
couple told his/her family about the intended blessing liturgy? Is the family supportive, hostile, or grieving, or
simply absent? How will each family respond to the individual’s partner: will the family define a partner as a
spouse and therefore part of the family, or will they treat one’s partner as a friend or roommate? In other
words, has the couple discussed what they anticipate their relationship with the in-laws will be as they enter
into a lifelong, committed relationship? Likewise, is the couple able to engage a network of support,
individually and as a couple, and do they perceive how it will become a part of their new life together?

Legal Matters
For different-sex/gender couples, marriage automatically comes with legal protections and obligations (above
and beyond the legality of the union itself). In civil jurisdictions outside the United States where no civil union
or marriage of same-sex couples is allowed, it is critical that GSM couples pursue private legal protections that
substitute for some of the legal protections flowing from civil marriage (though private measures cannot
cover all of the legal attributes of civil marriage). The couple should consider arranging for medical and
financial durable powers-of-attorney, wills, and living wills, and may need to seek professional advice
regarding financial and property matters. In addition, couples should consider soliciting legal advice on their
rights and risks, especially regarding issues of tax, Social Security, or other state and federal legal matters.

Children
As with any different-sex/gender, childless couple preparing for marriage, GSM couples should also discuss
with each other whether one or the other wants children. This discussion might include topics such as when
and how to have children, the impact of children on finances and employment, and matters of parenting, such
as childcare and discipline. Couples entering the relationship with children should discuss how to help the
children adjust and integrate into the new family constellation. GSM couples, especially those blessed with
children from a previous relationship, also need to support their children through various stages of
development, particularly as the children relate to their peers, who may have no understanding of, or possibly
even a hostile reaction to, a friend with GSM parents. For example, if a parent becomes involved with a GSM
partner, it may be controversial and require some adjustment in their child’s social circle.
GSM couples should be aware of the legal ambiguity pertaining to custodial cases and may want to seek
counsel to protect themselves and their children.

3. Presenters
Presenters are people chosen by the couple to support and present them to the presider and the assembly
during the blessing liturgy. The liturgies include the option of presenters, just as some congregations offer to
different-sex/gender couples. This option gives a voice to important people in the life of the couple during the
liturgy and enriches the experience for all present. Presenters can also serve an important role in supporting
Page 56 of 106

the couple before and after the blessing liturgy. The selection of a couple mature in their relationship can be
particularly helpful to a couple starting life together. The couple, together with the clergy or lay preparer,
should talk as soon as possible about selecting presenters, so that the prayerful work of the presenters can
begin early on.
Two short handouts provided in this pastoral resource (one for the couple and one for presenters) detail the
role of presenters and are intended for use at the conclusion of the initial preparation session.

4. Outline of Pre-Blessing Preparation
for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
Below is a guideline for a five-session, pre-blessing preparation that may be used along with the materials
described above. In a 2010 churchwide survey regarding pastoral and teaching materials, the Standing
Commission on Liturgy and Music found that a large number of trained lay preparers and clergy wanted a very
specific template; however, those with experience preparing couples may choose to adapt, combine, or
reorder this outline. Ideally, sessions last 60 to 90 minutes each, and both partners should be present for all
sessions (although the preparer may decide to meet with one of the individuals to address specific issues).

Goal
Pre-blessing preparation sets as its goal the strengthening of a lifelong, monogamous partnership rooted in
Christ. General Convention Resolution 2000–D039 addresses the hope—the Church’s and the couple’s—for
an enduring relationship:
Resolved, That we expect such relationships will be characterized by fidelity, monogamy,
mutual affection and respect, careful, honest communication, and the holy love which enables
those in such relationships to see in each other the image of God; and be it further
Resolved, That we denounce promiscuity, exploitation, and abusiveness in the relationships of
any of our members; and be it further
Resolved, That this Church intends to hold all its members accountable to these values, and will
provide for them the prayerful support, encouragement, and pastoral care necessary to live
faithfully by them.

Expectations
Realities:
•

Clergy and lay people are trained in many different ways to conduct premarital preparation.

•

Clergy and trained lay people apply a wide variety of methods for pre-blessing/marriage
preparation.

Assumptions:
•

The priest or bishop is prepared to preside at the blessing.

•

The clergyperson or trained lay preparer is experienced in preparing couples before marriages
and / or blessings.

•

The clergyperson or trained lay preparer is willing to refer the couple to a professional therapist
should circumstances warrant.

Truth:
•

Each couple is unique, requiring adaptations as appropriate.
Page 57 of 106

Preparing Gender and Sexual Minority Couples in Long-term Relationships
When preparing people who have been together for many years, the session structure may need to be
changed, and fewer sessions may be needed. One suggestion is to adapt the first session to get to know the
couple, introduce the liturgy, and so on. The second session could employ the following questions or
discussion topics, which respect the length of the couple’s relationship and invite them to discuss their
understanding of the Church.
•

What does it mean to you to have your relationship blessed by the Church after all these years?

•

How will having the Church’s blessing and making a commitment in public, even if you have done
so privately or in a non-church setting, affect you or your relationship?

•

What can your relationship teach the Church?

Finally, the third session could be adapted from the current fifth session: wrapping up, clarifying the liturgy,
and fielding any other questions that may have arisen.

Session One: Getting to Know You and an Overview
This session focuses on getting to know one another. It also starts to address the details of the rite, offering
the couple and the clergyperson an opportunity to study the rite together, looking at its meaning and choices
and affirming that the blessing, grounded in God, is given through the Church. Some clergy, however, may
prefer to do a very general overview of the rites in this session, then study them more intensely later in the
process.
Addressing the practical issues of the blessing at the outset helps to build trust and allows the couple to open
themselves to the substance of the next four sessions. By providing even a general overview of the rites, the
preparer can address questions and alleviate anxieties about the actual day.
Session One includes a great deal of material, some of which may be moved to another session. Handouts for
this session include:
•

The liturgy “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant. 

•

1. Theological Reflection on Covenantal Relationship: Spiritual Practice for Gender and Sexual
Minority Couples (found at the end of this outline).

•

2. Declaration of Intention for Lifelong Covenant (found at the end of this outline).

•

3. About Presenters—For the Couple (found at the end of this outline).

•

4. Information for Presenters (found at the end of this outline).

Outline of Session One
•

Pray together.

•

Get to know one another (varies as to how well the preparer knows the couple).

•

Explore the couples’ religious backgrounds, their experiences with the church(es), and their
reasons for being in this congregation.

•

Reflect on the theological significance of the couple’s relationship. The handout Theological
Reflection on Covenantal Relationship: Spiritual Practice for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
may be useful in this discussion. (This reflection might be moved to a later session.)

•

Review and ask the couple to sign the Declaration of Intention for Lifelong Covenant.

•

Walk through the blessing rite, raising theological issues and naming liturgical choices:

Page 58 of 106

▪
▪
▪
▪

Discuss the eucharist as normative in the service. However, including a celebration of the
eucharist may not be appropriate if only one member of the couple is Christian.
Emphasize the difference between a civil service and an ecclesial blessing.
Answer general questions regarding details of the service and the Church’s practice.
Introduce the possibility of presenters.

At the end of the session, provide written handouts and suggest “homework  topics for the couple to think
about for Sessions Two and Three:
•

Families of origin and growing up in them:
▪

•

What worked and didn’t work so well in their families of origin (this topic may also influence
work in Session Four).
▪ Family Church/religious history as well as each individual’s history—positive and negative—
with the Church/religion.
Marriages of family members, particularly parents:
▪
▪
▪

Parents’ ways of dealing with conflict.
Parents’ styles of child-rearing.
Family tolerance of children’s sexual orientation or gender identity.

Session Two: Learning from the Past, Part 1
This session provides a time for one member of the couple to speak and for the other to listen. Session Two
opens with prayer, then looks back to focus upon the relationship of one partner with his/her family of origin,
including exploring the marriage(s) of his/her parents and siblings and, if possible, grandparents and close
friends. This discussion includes what the individual would or would not replicate from the past in his/her own
ongoing and future relationships, particularly the relationship that is to be blessed. In addition, the individual
can look at levels of acceptance of his/her relationship by his/her family and at other issues from family of
origin and childhood.
The guiding assumption underlying this analysis is that certain issues are replicated from generation to
generation, and that, once the issues are identified, individuals can choose to continue those patterns or
deliberately alter them. This session works most effectively if the conversation flows naturally, rather than
following a rigid interview, and if it includes the following important areas:
•

Family: number and birth order of siblings.

•

Money: its role and influence in the family.

•

Sex: attitudes in family of origin about monogamy, fidelity, and the role of sex in relationship.

•

Alcohol and drugs: their places within the family as children grew.

•

In-laws: relationship with in-laws and greater family.

•

Children:

•

▪ agreement or disagreement between parents about child-rearing.
▪ the individual’s feelings about being a child in his/her family.
Conflict: parents’ methods of arguing and disagreeing.

As the conversation concludes, the preparer invites the individual to identify what he/she would or would not
replicate in his/her own adult relationship with the life partner. Following that, the silent partner is given the
floor to comment on what he/she has heard and learned, especially any surprises.

Page 59 of 106

Session Three: Learning from the Past, Part 2
This session continues the look back by extending the chance for the other member of the couple to speak
about his/her family of origin. Both members of the couple need the opportunity to explore the topics and to
hear each other’s stories so that each can learn and appreciate more deeply what the other brings to their
relationship.
Session Three, which also begins with prayer, duplicates with the second person the process with the first
from Session Two. If time permits at the end, the couple might discuss the impact of family history on their
own relationship.

Session Four: Looking to the Future
This session, an opportunity to look at the relationship today and into the future, invites the couple to name
areas in the relationship that appear strong and supportive while also opening a space to identify and address
areas that may be problematic. Thoughts, questions, and new information from previous sessions may help
determine where the couple is today and where their relationship and household may need attention in the
future.
After opening with prayer, this session should include discussion of:
•

The couple’s relationship in general: in-depth exploration of where they have been and where
they are now.

•

The role of sex and intimacy in the relationship (for example, potential changes of sexual
behavior as a result of committing to a monogamous relationship).

•

The role of alcohol and drugs in the relationship.

•

Money (for example, household finances and financial planning).

•

Legal protections (for example, medical and financial durable powers-of-attorney, wills, living
wills, and insurance).

•

Household roles (for example, who takes out the trash, who keeps the social calendar).

•

Communication:

•

▪ How the couple talks things through.
▪ What happens when they disagree.
Concerns for the future.

•

Decision-making as a couple.

•

Dealing with families as individuals (one’s own as well as one’s partner’s) and as a couple.

•

Support networks, now and in the future.

Session Four concludes with a discussion of the need for boundaries between generations so that the couples’
life as a unit may be seen as distinct from older and younger generations.

Session Five: Liturgical Decisions and Wrap-up
Session Five, focused on the blessing service itself, is an opportunity to make choices for the liturgy, based on
the Theological Reflection on Covenantal Relationship handed out (and discussed) at the first session. The depth
of this discussion will be determined by what was or was not addressed in Session One. In addition, as the final
session, Session Five serves as a time to consider questions that may have arisen from previous sessions.

Page 60 of 106

Outline of Session Five
•

Pray together.

•

Address questions and concerns regarding previous sessions and other issues that have arisen.

•

Review theological reflections in light of previous sessions and what is to come. The preparer can
help the couple connect the spiritual practices of their life as a couple and the “staging  of the
service. For example, will they process into the service together or separately, or will they be
already in the worship space as the liturgy begins? Will they sit together during the Ministry of
the Word or across the aisle from one another?

•

Discuss details of the service itself:
▪

•

Scripture (which passages speak particularly to the couple’s life together) and whether nonbiblical readings may be included.
▪ Will the liturgy take place at the congregation’s principal weekly celebration? Is celebration
of the eucharist to be omitted for pastoral reasons?
▪ Other liturgical choices, especially:
• Which collect will be used?
• Which of the two vows will be used?
• Will rings be exchanged, or, if rings have already been worn, are they to be blessed?
• What music, if any, will be included? (The couple should consult with the
congregation’s musician.)
Discuss presenters and their roles in supporting the couple in the service and in their ongoing
life.

In closing, the preparer can assure the couple that they have done hard and important work together, work
that is a gift both to the preparer and to the couple. The preparer can express his/her eager anticipation of the
couple’s blessing and of meeting their close and extended families, seeing them with their friends, and
celebrating their relationship in the sight of God.

Page 61 of 106

Handouts for
“Hearing, Seeing, and Declaring New Things 

Contents
1. Theological Reflection on Covenantal Relationship:
Spiritual Practice for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
2. Declaration of Intention for Lifelong Covenant
3. About Presenters—For the Couple
4. Information for Presenters
5. Model Congregational Guidelines
The Declaration of Intention requires the replacement of N.N. and N. N. in the first sentence with the couple’s
names.
Handouts 3 through 5 are samples that may be adapted for the use of a specific congregation. In these, “N.
Episcopal Church  should be replaced with the congregation’s name, and a similar change made for “Episcopal
Diocese of X. 

Page 62 of 106

Handout 1

Theological Reflection on Covenantal Relationship:
Spiritual Practice for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
Christian Life and Covenants
All Christians are called to bear witness to the good news of God’s love and grace in Jesus Christ,
through the power of the Holy Spirit. We are empowered for such witness by our covenantal
relationship with God.
Baptism initiates us into that covenant, making us Christ’s own forever and members of Christ’s Body,
the Church. The eucharist sustains us in that covenantal life and strengthens us to be Christ’s
witnesses in the world.
Our covenantal life with God is expressed in relationships of commitment and faithfulness, including
those of gender and sexual minority couples. It is the Church’s joy to celebrate these relationships as
signs of God’s love, to pray for God’s grace to support couples in their life together, and to join with
these couples in our shared witness to the gospel in the world.

Themes for Theological Reflection and Spiritual Practice
A sacramental framework for covenantal relationships offers a way to reflect on the grace of Christ
and the fruit of the Spirit in the lives of faithful, committed couples. Several theological themes can
assist couples as they consider their covenantal vows as a form of spiritual practice:
•

Vocation: God calls people into various kinds of relationship, whether as single people, in
monastic communities, or as intimate couples. These vocational callings can empower
our witness to the gospel. The decision to enter into a covenantal union is a vocation
marked by these characteristics: “fidelity, monogamy, mutual affection and respect,
careful, honest communication, and the holy love which enables those in such
relationships to see in each other the image of God. 
• Households: Covenantal relationships are often lived in households in which we practice
daily the giving of ourselves for the good of another. While households take many
different forms, they create a space of mutual trust and accountability. The joy, intimacy,
and shared vulnerability of households can thus help us learn the spiritual disciplines of
compassion, forgiveness, and reconciliation in lives of committed monogamy and
fidelity.
• Fruitfulness: The divine grace that sustains a covenantal relationship bears fruit in
countless ways, not only for the couple but for the wider community as well. Covenanted
couples manifest this grace in their shared gifts for ministry and in lives of service,
generosity, and hospitality.
• Mutual Blessing: A blessed relationship is set apart for a divine purpose: to bear witness
to the creating, redeeming, and sanctifying love of God in the world. As the Spirit
empowers the couple for this witness, the Church is likewise blessed and strengthened
for its mission and ministry.
In all of these ways and more, the blessing of a relationship invites the couple and the whole Church
to renew our commitment to the Baptismal Covenant. That commitment is expressed by faith in the
Page 63 of 106

good news of Jesus Christ, in the hope for union with God that Christ promised, and with the love
that knits us together as the Body of Christ. As the apostle Paul says, we live our life together as God’s
people with faith, hope, and love. And the greatest of these is love (1 Corinthians 13:13).

Page 64 of 106

Handout 2

Declaration of Intention for Lifelong Covenant

NOTE: This template is presented for use with gender and sexual minority couples preparing for
The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant, since a similar declaration is required by the
Canons of the Episcopal Church (Canon I.18.4) prior to the solemnization of a marriage.

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
We, N.N. and N.N., desiring to receive the blessing of a Lifelong Covenant, do solemnly declare
that we hold this covenant to be our lifelong commitment as provided by The Episcopal Church
gathered in General Convention.
We believe that our covenant is intended by God for our mutual joy, for the encouragement
and support given one another in daily life and changing circumstances, for bringing God’s
grace to our community, for the deepening of faith as we experience God’s love in our love for
one another, and (if it may be) for the physical and spiritual nurture of children. This covenant
shall be nurtured and characterized by fidelity, monogamy, mutual affection and respect,
careful, honest communication, and the holy love which shall enable us to see in each other
the image of God.
And we do engage ourselves, so far as in us lies, to make our utmost effort to establish this
covenant and to seek God’s help hereto.

______________________________

________________________________

Signature

Signature

Date

Page 65 of 106

Sample Handout 3

About Presenters—For the Couple
At N. Episcopal Church, we consider “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant  to be a celebration
supported by the congregation, much as candidates for baptism are supported by all the members of the
Church. Just as those who are baptized are initiated into the full life of the Church, those who receive the
Church’s blessing upon their relationship are embraced in a new way in the faith community.

The Blessing Liturgy
The presentation takes place immediately after the sermon, as follows:
The couple comes before the assembly. If there is to be a presentation, the presenters stand with the
couple, and the Presider says to them
Presider
Presenters
Presider
Presenters

Who presents N. and N., as they seek the blessing of God and the Church on
their love and life together?
We do.
Will you love, respect, and pray for N. and N., and do all in your power to
stand with them in the life they will share?
We will.

Choosing Presenters
There are a variety of possibilities for choosing presenters who will stand with you and present you at the
liturgy. It can be helpful to choose at least one member of this faith community to walk with you through this
process. If you are new to the congregation, the priest (or other person designated) can help you discern
whom you might consider. The selection of a couple mature in their relationship can be particularly helpful if
you are just beginning your life together. Often, couples will choose their own parents, children, or other
supportive family members to be their presenters.
Presenters can pray for you during the period of preparation before your blessing, keep you connected to the
congregation, and continue to support you in your ongoing covenanted life together.
Finally, in choosing, remember that these people will stand with you during the liturgy and present you at this
rite. Also remember that, immediately after you are presented, the entire congregation will vow to support
you as you, in turn, become a blessing and bear grace to the entire congregation.
Because presenters serve an important role before and after the blessing, you and your clergyperson should
talk early about selecting presenters, so that your prayerful partnership may begin as soon as possible.

Page 66 of 106

Sample Handout 4

Information for Presenters
At N. Episcopal Church, we consider “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant  to be a celebration
supported by the congregation, much as candidates for baptism are supported by all the members of the
Church. Just as those who are baptized are initiated into the full life of the Church, those who receive the
Church’s blessing upon their relationship are embraced in a new way in the faith community.
At the blessing service, you present the couple to the presider and to the assembly, as follows:
The couple comes before the assembly. If there is to be a presentation, the presenters stand with the
couple, and the Presider says to them
Presider
Presenters
Presider
Presenters

Who presents N. and N., as they seek the blessing of God and the Church on
their love and life together?
We do.
Will you love, respect, and pray for N. and N., and do all in your power to
stand with them in the life they will share?
We will.

As a presenter, your role begins even before the blessing. We encourage you to pray for the couple both
privately and in the Prayers of the People at Sunday services during their period of preparation. You can
continue to support their ongoing life by acknowledging the anniversary of their blessing and offering your
presence whenever their household experiences times of difficulty or celebrates occasions of joy. If you are a
member of the congregation, you also have a role in keeping them connected to others in the congregation.
As a presenter, you promise to support the couple as they become a blessing and bear grace to their families
and friends, the Church, and the world. In this role, then, you are a witness to the blessing given and received
in the liturgy and carried forth by the couple into the world.

Page 67 of 106

Sample Handout 5

Model Congregational Guidelines
NOTE: Most congregations adopt some form of marriage policy expressing norms and guidelines for differentsex/gender couples preparing for marriage. All congregations may engage in a helpful and fruitful exercise to
develop guidelines that reflect the Christian community in which they worship; the guidelines that are developed
should apply to both different-sex/gender couples and gender and sexual minority couples. Such a policy is
optional at the discretion of the clergy in consultation with the vestry or bishop’s committee. As always with
liturgical matters, final decisions are the responsibility of the clergy. Following is a model of a guideline that
applies for all couples preparing for marriage or a blessing. It may be modified to meet specific situations and
needs.

Information for All Couples Seeking the Church’s Blessing at N. Episcopal Church
A. Introduction
The Christian community at N. Episcopal Church understands that relationships are complex and that making
a lifelong commitment to a relationship through a marriage or blessing is a significant, exciting, and wonderfilled event in people’s lives. We also believe that a Christian community that agrees to bless such a relationship
needs to be intentional about supporting the couple as they prepare for the blessing and as they live out their
lives.
We understand that committed, lifelong relationships, whether for gender and sexual minority couples or
different-sex/gender couples, are to be outward and visible signs of an inward, spiritual, and God-given love.
In this context, N. Episcopal Church seeks to support all couples in their commitment to one another and to
help make the love of God more visible for the whole community.

B. Guidelines
The following guidelines have been adopted by the lay and ordained leaders of N. Episcopal Church:
1. As required for different-sex/gender couples seeking marriage according to the Book of
Common Prayer, at least one member of a gender and sexual minority couple must be baptized.
2. It is desirable that at least one member of the couple be an active member of this, or some
other, Christian community. We hope this membership might include giving serious, prayerful
consideration to supporting the congregation through time, talent, and/or treasure.
3. Approximately six months’ notice should be given to allow for planning and pastoral
preparation.
4. If the couple has no connection with N. Episcopal Church but wishes to have the marriage
or blessing at N. Episcopal Church or to use the services of N. Episcopal Church’s priest:
•
•

They should be able to show that at least one of the couple has active membership in
another Episcopal or Christian congregation.
They need to complete marriage or blessing preparation with their own or other
clergyperson or a qualified lay preparer.

Page 68 of 106

•

They might consider making a financial contribution to N. Episcopal Church in
thanksgiving for their marriage or blessing and for the ongoing support of the Church,
its ministry and mission. A creative formula to calculate this contribution might be to
consider a tithe (10 percent) of the budget for the entire celebration. [Clergy have
discretion here, as resources vary greatly from couple to couple. Also, if a couple is
returning to Church for the first time, an unconditional welcome may be the best pastoral
response.]

In all cases, it is important that all concerned comply with the laws of the State, the Canons of the Episcopal
Church, and the canons and policies of the Episcopal Diocese of X, as well as the directives of the diocesan
bishop, including compliance with diocesan policies for cases in which the relationship is not the first marriage
or committed relationship for one or both people.

Page 69 of 106

IV. THE WITNESSING AND BLESSING
OF A LIFELONG COVENA NT*
Concerning the Service

This rite is appropriately celebrated in the context of the Holy Eucharist and may take place at the principal
Sunday Liturgy. This rite then replaces the Ministry of the Word. A bishop or priest normally presides. Parallel
texts from Enriching Our Worship 1 are included as options for elements of this rite.
At least one of the couple must be a baptized Christian.
Two or more presenters, who may be friends, parents, family members, or drawn from the local assembly,
may present the couple to the presider and the assembly.
As indicated in the opening address, the consent, and the blessing of the rings, the rite may be modified for
use with a couple who have previously made a lifelong commitment to one another.

* Prepared by the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music, 2009-2012; revised by the Commission 2012-2015
Page 70 of 106

The Witnessing and Blessing
of a Lifelong Covenant
The Word of God
Gathering
The couple to be blessed joins the assembly.
A hymn of praise, psalm, or anthem may be sung, or instrumental music may be played.
The Presider says the following, the People standing
Presider
People

Blessed be God: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Blessed be God, now and for ever. Amen.

In place of the above may be said
Presider
People

Blessed be the one, holy, and living God.
Glory to God for ever and ever.

From Easter Day through the Day of Pentecost
Presider
People

Alleluia. Christ is risen.
The Lord is risen indeed. Alleluia.

In place of the above may be said
Presider
People

Alleluia. Christ is risen.
Christ is risen indeed. Alleluia.

Then may be said
Presider
People
Presider
People
Presider
People

Beloved, let us love one another,
For love is of God.
Whoever does not love does not know God,
For God is love.
Since God so loves us,
Let us love one another.

The Presider may address the assembly in these words

Dear friends in Christ,
or
Dearly beloved,
in the name of God and the Church
we have come together today with N.N. and N.N.,
to witness the vows they make,
committing themselves to one another.
Page 71 of 106

Forsaking all others,
they will bind themselves to one another
in a covenant of mutual fidelity and steadfast love,
remaining true to one another in heart, body, and mind,
as long as they both shall live.
Such a lifelong commitment
is not to be entered into lightly or thoughtlessly,
but responsibly and with reverence.
Let us pray, then, that God will give them the strength
to remain steadfast in what they vow this day.
Let us also pray for the generosity to support them
in the commitment they undertake,
and for the wisdom to see God at work in their life together.
Or this, for those who have previously made a lifelong commitment to one another

Dear friends in Christ [or Dearly beloved],
in the name of God and the Church,
we have come together with N.N. and N.N.,
to witness the sacred vows they make
as they solemnize [or reaffirm] their commitment to one another.
Today they renew their covenant of mutual fidelity and steadfast love,
forsaking all others and remaining true to one another in heart, body, and mind,
as long as they both shall live.
Let us pray, then, that God will give them the strength
to remain steadfast in what they vow this day.
Let us also pray for the generosity
to support them in the commitment they undertake,
and for the wisdom to see God at work in their life together.

The Collect of the Day
The Lord be with you.
And also with you.
Let us pray.

Presider
People
Presider

or

God be with you.

The Presider says one of the following Collects

God of abundance:
assist by your grace N. and N.,
whose covenant of love and fidelity we witness this day.
Grant them your protection, that with firm resolve
they may honor and keep the vows they make;
through Jesus Christ our Savior,
who lives and reigns with you in the unity of the Holy Spirit,
one God, for ever and ever. Amen.
or this

Almighty and everliving God:
Page 72 of 106

look tenderly upon N. and N.,
who stand before you in the company of your Church.
Let their life together bring them great joy.
Grant them so to love selflessly and live humbly,
that they may be to one another and to the world
a witness and a sign of your never-failing love and care;
through Jesus Christ your Son our Lord,
who lives and reigns with you and the Holy Spirit,
one God, to the ages of ages. Amen.
or this

O God, faithful and true,
whose steadfast love endures for ever:
we give you thanks for sustaining N. and N. in the life they share
and for bringing them to this day.
Nurture them and fill them with joy in their life together,
continuing the good work you have begun in them;
and grant us, with them, a dwelling place eternal in the heavens
where all your people will share the joy of perfect love,
and where you, with the Son and the Holy Spirit, live and reign,
one God, now and for ever. Amen.
or this, for those who bring children

Holy Trinity, one God,
three Persons perfect in unity and equal in majesty:
Draw together with bonds of love and affection
N. and N., who with their families
seek to live in harmony and forbearance all their days,
that their joining together will be to us
a reflection of that perfect communion
which is your very essence and life,
O Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
who live and reign in glory everlasting. Amen.

The Lessons
The people sit. Then one or more of the following passages of Scripture is read. If the Holy Communion is to be celebrated, a
passage from the Gospels always concludes the Readings. When the blessing is celebrated in the context of the Sunday
Eucharist, the Readings of the Sunday are used, except with the permission of the Bishop.
Ruth 1:16–17
1 Samuel 18:1b, 3; 20:16–17; 42a;
or 1 Samuel 18:1–4

Ecclesiastes 4:9–12
Song of Solomon 2:10–13; 8:6–7
Micah 4:1–4

Romans 12:9–18
1 Corinthians 12:31b–13:13
2 Corinthians 5:17–20
Galatians 5:14, 22–26

Ephesians 3:14–21
Colossians 3:12–17
1 John 3:18–24
1 John 4:7–16, 21

When a biblical passage other than one from the Gospels is to be read, the Reader announces it with these words
Reader

A Reading from

.
Page 73 of 106

After the Reading, the Reader may say
or
or

The Word of the Lord.
Hear what the Spirit is saying to God’s people.
Hear what the Spirit is saying to the Churches.
Thanks be to God.

People

Between the Readings, a psalm, hymn, or anthem may be sung or said. Appropriate psalms are Psalm 65, Psalm 67, Psalm
85:7–13, Psalm 98, Psalm 100, Psalm 126, Psalm 127, Psalm 133, Psalm 148, and Psalm 149:1–5.
Appropriate passages from the Gospels are
Matthew 5:1–16
Mark 12:28–34
Luke 6:32–38

John 15:9–17
John 17:1–2, 18–26

All standing, the Deacon or Priest reads the Gospel, first saying

The Holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ according to
or
People

The Holy Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ according to

.
.

Glory to you, Lord Christ.

After the Gospel, the Reader says
People

The Gospel of the Lord.
Praise to you, Lord Christ.

The Sermon

The Witnessing of the Vows and the Blessing of the Covenant
The couple comes before the assembly. If there is to be a presentation, the presenters stand with the couple, and the
Presider says to them
Presider
Presenters
Presider
Presenters

Who presents N. and N., as they seek the blessing of God and the Church on their love and life
together?
We do.
Will you love, respect, and pray for N. and N., and do all in your power to stand with them in
the life they will share?
We will.

The Presider then addresses the couple, saying

N. and N., you have come before God and the Church to exchange [and renew] solemn vows
with one another and to ask God’s blessing.
The Presider addresses one member of the couple, saying
Presider
N., do you freely and unreservedly offer yourself to N.?
Answer
I do.

Page 74 of 106

Presider

Will you [continue to] live together in faithfulness and holiness of life as long as you both shall
live?
I will, with God’s help.

Answer
The Presider addresses the other member of the couple, saying
Presider
N., do you freely and unreservedly offer yourself to N.?
Answer
I do.
Presider
Will you [continue to] live together in faithfulness and holiness of life as long as you both shall
Answer

live?
I will, with God’s help.

The assembly stands, the couple faces the People, and the Presider addresses them, saying
Presider
Will all of you gathered to witness these vows do all in your power to uphold and honor this
People
Presider
People

couple in the covenant they make?
We will.
Will you pray for them, especially in times of trouble, and celebrate with them in times of joy?
We will.

The Prayers
The Presider then introduces the prayers
Presider
Then let us pray for N. and N. in their life together and for the concerns of this community.
A Deacon or another leader bids prayers for the couple.
Prayers for the Church and for the world, for the concerns of the local community, for those who suffer or face trouble, and
for the departed are also appropriate. If the rite takes place in the principal Sunday worship of the congregation, the rubric
concerning the Prayers of the People on page 359 of the Book of Common Prayer is followed.
Adaptations or insertions may be made to the form that follows.
A bar in the margin indicates a bidding that may be omitted.
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader

People

For N. and N., seeking your blessing and the blessing of your holy people;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For a spirit of loving-kindness to shelter them all their days;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For friends to support them and communities to enfold them;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For peace in their home and love in their family;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For the grace and wisdom to care for the children you entrust to them [or may entrust to
them];
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
Page 75 of 106

Leader

People
Leader
People
Leader
People

For the honesty to acknowledge when they hurt each other, and the humility to seek each
other’s forgiveness and yours;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For the outpouring of your love through their work and witness;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For the strength to keep the vows each of us has made;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.

The leader may add one or more of the following biddings
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader

People

For all who have been reborn and made new in the waters of Baptism;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For those who lead and serve in communities of faith;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For those who seek justice, peace, and concord among nations;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For those who are sick or suffering, homeless or poor;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For victims of violence and those who inflict it;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For communion with all who have died, [especially those whom we remember
this day:
];
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.

The Presider concludes the Prayers with the following or another appropriate Collect

Giver of every gift, source of all goodness,
hear the prayers we bring before you for N. and N.,
who seek your blessing this day.
Strengthen them as they share in the saving work of Jesus,
and bring about for them and for all you have created
the fullness of life he promised,
who now lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.
If the Eucharist is to follow, the Lord’s Prayer is omitted here.

Page 76 of 106

Leader

People
and Leader

As our Savior Christ
has taught us,
we now pray,

And now, as our Savior
Christ has taught us,
we are bold to say,

Our Father in heaven,
hallowed be your Name,
your kingdom come,
your will be done,
on earth as in heaven.
Give us today our daily bread.
Forgive us our sins
as we forgive those
who sin against us.
Save us from the time of trial,
and deliver us from evil.
For the kingdom, the power,
and the glory are yours,
now and for ever. Amen.

Our Father, who art in heaven,
hallowed be thy Name,
thy kingdom come,
thy will be done,
on earth as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses,
as we forgive those
who trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil.
For thine is the kingdom,
and the power, and the glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.

The Commitment
The People sit. The couple stands, facing the Presider.

N. and N., I invite you now, illumined by the Word of God and strengthened by the prayer of
this community, to make your covenant before God and the Church.

Presider

Each member of the couple, in turn, takes the right hand of the other and says

In the name of God,
I, N., give myself to you, N., and take you to myself
I will support and care for you by the grace of God:
in times of sickness, in times of health.
I will hold and cherish you in the love of Christ:
in times of plenty, in times of want.
I will honor and keep you with the Spirit’s help:
in times of anguish, in times of joy,
forsaking all others, as long as we both shall live.
This is my solemn vow.
or this

In the name of God,
I, N., give myself to you, N., and take you to myself
I will support and care for you:
in times of sickness, in times of health.
I will hold and cherish you:
in times of plenty, in times of want.
I will honor and love you:
in times of anguish, in times of joy,
forsaking all others, as long as we both shall live.
This is my solemn vow.
Page 77 of 106

If rings are to be exchanged, they are brought before the Presider, who prays using the following words

Let us pray.
Bless, O God, these rings
as signs of the enduring covenant
N. and N. have made with each other,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The two people place the rings on the fingers of one another, first the one, then the other, saying

N., I give you this ring as a symbol of my vow,
and with all that I am, and all that I have, I honor you,
in the name of God.
or
in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit.
If the two have previously given and worn rings as a symbol of their commitment, the rings may be blessed on the hands of
the couple, the Presider saying

Let us pray.
By the rings which they have worn, faithful God,
N. and N. have shown to one another and the world
their love and faithfulness.
Bless now these rings,
that from this day forward
they may be signs of the vows N. and N. have exchanged
in your presence and in the communion of your Church,
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Pronouncement
The Presider joins the right hands and says

Now that N. and N. have exchanged vows of love and fidelity
in the presence of God and the Church,
I now pronounce that they are bound to one another
as long as they both shall live. Amen.

Blessing of the Couple
As the couple stands or kneels, the Presider invokes God’s blessing upon them, saying

Let us pray.
Most gracious God,
we praise you for the tender mercy and unfailing care
revealed to us in Jesus the Christ
and for the great joy and comfort bestowed upon us
in the gift of human love.
We give you thanks for N. and N.,
and the covenant of faithfulness they have made.
Pour out the abundance of your Holy Spirit upon them.
Keep them in your steadfast love;
Page 78 of 106

protect them from all danger;
fill them with your wisdom and peace;
lead them in holy service to each other and the world.
The Presider continues with one of the following

God the Father,
God the Son,
God the Holy Spirit,
bless, preserve, and keep you,
and mercifully grant you rich and boundless grace,
that you may please God in body and soul.
God make you a sign of the loving-kindness and steadfast fidelity
manifest in the life, death, and resurrection of our Savior,
and bring you at last to the delight of the heavenly banquet,
where he lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.
or this

God, the holy and undivided Trinity,
bless, preserve, and keep you,
and mercifully grant you rich and boundless grace,
that you may please God in body and soul.
God make you a sign of the loving-kindness and steadfast fidelity
manifest in the life, death, and resurrection of our Savior,
and bring you at last to the delight of the heavenly banquet,
where he lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.

The Peace
The Presider bids the Peace.
Presider
People

The peace of the Lord be always with you.
And also with you.

In place of the above may be said
Presider
People

The peace of Christ be always with you.
And also with you.

The liturgy continues with the Holy Communion. When the Eucharist is not celebrated, the Presider blesses the people. The
Deacon, or in the absence of a Deacon, the Priest, dismisses them.

At the Eucharist
The liturgy continues with the Offertory, at which the couple may present the offerings of bread and wine.
The following proper preface may be said.

Because in the giving of two people to each other in faithful love
you reveal the joy and abundant life you share
with your Son Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit.
The following postcommunion prayer may be said.

God our strength and joy,
Page 79 of 106

we thank you for the communion of our life together,
for the example of holy love that you give us in N. and N.,
and for the Sacrament of the Body and Blood
of our Savior Jesus Christ.
Grant that it may renew our hope
and nourish us for the work you set before us
to witness to the presence of Christ in the world,
through the power of your Spirit,
and to the glory of your Name. Amen.

Page 80 of 106

V. A RITE OF BLESSING ,
NOT MARRIAGE
prepared by
The Task Force on the Study of Marriage 2015-2018

A Rite of Blessing
The rite for “The Blessing of a Lifelong Relationship  is a pastoral response to couples who desire to
form and formalize a relationship with another that is monogamous, unconditional, and lifelong. It
provides a public recognition and blessing of the relationship, offering the support of the community
for the couple. The couple may be choosing not to merge property and finances and not to undertake
other legal encumbrances of civil marriage, or they may be concerned that the requirement to furnish
documentation in order to obtain a marriage license may result in civil penalties, including
deportation.
This liturgy is intended only for couples for whom the consequences of a legal marriage pose a
significant threat to their well-being. It is appropriate, for example, for a widowed person receiving
their deceased spouse’s pension who would lose the pension benefits upon remarriage and be left
destitute by the death of a subsequent spouse. It is also appropriate for undocumented immigrants
who may be deported when presenting the identification required to obtain a marriage license. This
rite is not to be used for reasons of mere convenience; in marriage, we make ourselves vulnerable to
our spouse in a multitude of ways, and this liturgy should not be used to evade those ordinary risks
of relationship. The officiating clergyperson must discern carefully with the couple to determine
whether this rite of blessing or a legally binding marriage is most appropriate. The couple is also
advised to seek the advice of an attorney.

The Need for Blessing, Not Marriage
In April 2017, the Pew Research Center reported that the number of cohabitating adults ages 50 and
over had increased by 75% since 2007, in part due the aging of baby boomers. Most of these
Page 81 of 106

cohabitors had previously been married; 55% are divorced, and an additional 13% are widowed. For
those ages 65 and over, 27% are widowed. About one-fourth of cohabitors ages 50 and older have
never been married.1
Older adults who have been previously married and find new partners face unique circumstances.
Remarriage may affect inheritance and may threaten receipt of entitlement incomes, such as Social
Security. Some researchers have found that “single older women especially fear that by remarrying
they will become trapped in traditional marital roles, have to assume caregiving burdens, and give up
control of their finances to a new husband.  2 Thus many women prefer nonmarital unions such as
cohabitation. In contrast, older men report that emotional support is a primary reason for seeking a
new partner.3
Some older couples who choose to cohabit rather than remarry may seek a blessing of their union.
Clergy report that such couples are making an intentional lifelong, faithful, monogamous
commitment, yet they do not want a civil marriage because it will mean a loss of pension, Social
Security benefits, or other financial supports, or will compromise or complicate their children’s
inheritance.

Legal Issues
In recent decades, some congregations and dioceses began to offer blessings of committed lifelong
relationships apart from civil marriage for same-sex couples who could not legally marry. As the
Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music developed resources for these blessings, a recurring
question surfaced: some clergy in states where marriage of same-sex couples was not legal
wondered whether they were exposing themselves to possible civil legal consequences if they
performed a blessing service for a same-sex couple, giving church recognition to their relationship,
when that couple was barred from obtaining a marriage license. As the 2015 Report of the Task Force
on the Study of Marriage noted, this fear appeared unfounded:
Generally, state law requires a license issued to the couple, signed by the officiant, and
returned to the recording agency for registration, subject to penalties for the officiant who
fails to file the license; consent of the couple, freely, seriously, and plainly expressed in the
presence of the other; in the presence of a designated officiant; and with a declaration or
pronouncement by the officiant that the couple are married according to state law. 4

1

R enee Stepler, “Number of U.S. Adults Cohabiting with a Partner Continues To Rise, Especially among Those 50 and
Older,  Pew Research Center, April 6, 2017, http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/04/06/number-of-u-s-adultscohabiting-with-a-partner-continues-to-rise-especially-among-those-50-and-older/ (accessed 11/19/17).
2
Jonathan Vespa, “Union Formation in Later Life: Economic Determinants of Cohabitation and Remarriage Among
Older Adults,  Demography (2012), 49: 1105.
3
Vespa, “Union Formation in Later Life,  1105.
4
“The Marriage Canon: History and Critique,  Appendix 1: Essays on Marriage, in Report of the Task Force on the Study
of Marriage to the 78th General Convention (Reports to General Convention, 1976-2015, Archives of the Episcopal
Church), pp; 78-79, https://www.episcopalarchives.org/e-archives/gc_reports/reports/2015/bb_2015-R044.pdf (accessed
8/19/17).
Page 82 of 106

In the absence of an attempt to obtain and file a civil marriage license, the rite of blessing existed
solely as a religious rite with recognition protected by the First Amendment.
A subsequent North Carolina Court of Appeals decision added a new twist to questions about the
interplay between church and civil marriage: if a member of the clergy performs a prayer book
marriage service for a couple who do not obtain a civil marriage license, will that relationship be
recognized as a marriage for purposes of inheritance? The North Carolina Court of Appeals answered
yes (In the Matter of the Estate of Richard Dixon Peacock). Bernadine and Richard married on August
1, 1993, divorced in 2007, and reconciled in 2012. They attended an Episcopal church together weekly
and established a relationship with the priest, informing her that they intended to remarry but never
setting a definite date. In November 2013, Richard was hospitalized with chronic medical issues, and
while he was in the hospital, the couple decided to marry. Their priest performed a shortened version
of the “Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage  from The Book of Common Prayer. Because Richard
was hospitalized, no marriage license was obtained. The priest informed the couple that a marriage
license was required for a legal marriage and that the ceremony she was performing did not
constitute a legal marriage. Richard died on the day the following the ceremony, without a will.
Richard’s daughter applied for letters of administration, listing the surviving children as heirs.
Bernadine then filed a petition to be recognized as an heir of the estate. The case eventually made
its way to the North Carolina Court of Appeals, which in a July 2016 unanimous opinion held that the
marriage of December 2013 is valid and Bernadine was the spouse and an heir of Richard’s estate.
The Court of Appeals reached this conclusion based on the North Carolina statute that sets out the
requisites of marriage. According to the statute, a valid marriage is created by the consent of the
couple, “freely, seriously and plainly expressed by each in the presence of the other,  in the presence
of an ordained minister, with the declaration by the minister that the persons are married. 5 The
statute makes no mention of obtaining a marriage license. Relying on previous rulings dating back to
1893 that consistently held that a marriage performed without a state-issued license is nonetheless
valid when the conditions of the statute are fulfilled, the North Carolina Court of Appeals gave full
recognition to the marriage of Bernadine and Richard.

Conclusion
The rite that follows is intended solely as a religious rite of blessing. When the church offers God’s
blessing on a relationship, it recognizes God’s grace already at work in the life of the couple, it seeks
God’s continued grace and favor for the couple, and it seeks the power of the Holy Spirit to bear
witness to that grace in the world.6 In the rite, the couple make promises of lifelong faithfulness and
mutual support, the community pledges to uphold the couple in their commitment to each other and
prays for the couple, and the presider asks God’s blessing on the couple.

5

North Carolina General Statute §51-1 (2015).
“Faith, Hope, and Love: Theological Resources for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships,  “I Will Bless You and You Will Be a
Blessing , Liturgical Resources 1, revised and expanded ed. (New York: Church Publishing, 2015), p. 34.
6

Page 83 of 106

VI. THE BLESSING OF
A LIFELONG RELATIONS HIP*
Concerning the Service
This rite may be used by couples who desire to form and to formalize a relationship that is
monogamous, unconditional, and lifelong, but is nevertheless something different than a marriage
in that it does not include the merging of property, finances, or other legal encumbrances; and by
couples for whom the requirement to furnish identification to obtain a marriage license could result
in state penalties including deportation, because of their immigration status.
The rite shall not be used for mere convenience.
It is expected that couples using this rite will receive pastoral counseling in advance of the
celebration of this liturgy.
If one or both members of the couple have been the husband or wife of any other person currently
living, the Member of the Clergy officiating at this rite shall be satisfied by appropriate evidence
that the prior marriage has been annulled or dissolved by a final judgment or decree of a civil court
of competent jurisdiction; and shall have instructed the parties that continuing concern must be
shown for the well-being of the former spouse, and of any children of the prior marriage.
Couples who use this rite are strongly encouraged to seek legal counsel prior to the celebration.
This rite is appropriately celebrated in the context of the Holy Eucharist and may take place at the
principal Sunday Liturgy. This rite then replaces the Ministry of the Word. A bishop or priest
normally presides. Parallel texts from Enriching Our Worship 1 are included as options for elements
of this rite.
At least one of the couple must be a baptized Christian.
Two or more presenters, who may be friends, parents, family members, or drawn from the local
assembly, may present the couple to the presider and the assembly.

* Prepared by the Task Force on the Study of Marriage, 2015-2018
Page 84 of 106

The Blessing of a Lifelong Relationship

The Word of God
Gathering
The couple to be blessed joins the assembly.
A hymn of praise, psalm, or anthem may be sung, or instrumental music may be played.
The Presider says the following, the People standing
Presider Blessed be God: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
People
Blessed be God, now and for ever. Amen.
In place of the above may be said
Presider Blessed be the one, holy, and living God.
People
Glory to God for ever and ever.

From Easter Day through the Day of Pentecost
Presider Alleluia. Christ is risen.
People
The Lord is risen indeed. Alleluia.
In place of the above may be said
Presider Alleluia. Christ is risen.
People
Christ is risen indeed. Alleluia.

Then may be said
Presider Beloved, let us love one another,
People
For love is of God.
Presider Whoever does not love does not know God,
People
For God is love.
Presider Since God so loves us,
People
Let us love one another.
The Presider may address the assembly in these words
Dear friends in Christ,
in the name of God and the Church
we have come together today with N.N. and N.N.,
to witness the commitment they make to one another.
Page 85 of 106

Forsaking all others,
they will bind themselves to one another
with promises of mutual fidelity and steadfast love,
remaining true to one another in heart, body, and mind,
as long as they both shall live.
Such a lifelong commitment
is not to be entered into lightly or thoughtlessly,
but responsibly and with reverence.
Let us pray, then, that God will give them the strength
to remain steadfast in what they promise this day.
Let us also pray for the generosity to support them in the commitment they undertake,
and for the wisdom to see God at work in their life together.

The Collect of the Day
Presider
People
Presider

The Lord be with you.
And also with you.
Let us pray.

or God be with you.

The Presider says one of the following Collects
God of abundance:
assist by your grace N. and N.,
whose commitment to love and fidelity we witness this day.
Grant them your protection, that with firm resolve
they may honor and keep the promises they make;
through Jesus Christ our Savior,
who lives and reigns with you in the unity of the Holy Spirit,
one God, for ever and ever. Amen.
or this
Almighty and everliving God:
look tenderly upon N. and N.,
who stand before you in the company of your Church.
Let their life together bring them great joy.
Grant them to love selflessly and live humbly,
that they may be to one another and to the world
a witness and a sign of your never-failing love and care;
through Jesus Christ your Son our Lord,
who lives and reigns with you and the Holy Spirit,
one God, to the ages of ages. Amen.
or this, for those who bring children
Page 86 of 106

Holy Trinity, one God,
three Persons perfect in unity and equal in majesty:
Draw together with bonds of love and affection
N. and N., who with their families
seek to live in harmony and forbearance all their days,
that their joining together will be to us
a reflection of that perfect communion
which is your very essence and life,
O Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
who live and reign in glory everlasting. Amen.
The Lessons
The people sit. Then one or more of the following passages of Scripture is read. If the Holy
Communion is to be celebrated, a passage from the Gospels always concludes the Readings.
When the blessing is celebrated in the context of the Sunday Eucharist, the Readings of the
Sunday are used, except with the permission of the Bishop.
Ruth 1:16-17
1 Samuel 18:1b, 3, 20:16-17, 42a;
or 1 Samuel 18:1-4
Ecclesiastes 4:9-12
Song of Solomon 2:10-13, 8:6-7
Micah 4:1-4
Romans 12:9-18
1 Corinthians 12:31b-13:13
2 Corinthians 5:17-20
Galatians 5:14, 22-26
Ephesians 3:14-21
Colossians 3:12-17
1 John 3:18-24
1 John 4:7-16, 21
When a biblical passage other than one from the Gospels is to be read, the Reader announces it
with these words
Reader

A Reading from __________.

After the Reading, the Reader may say
The Word of the Lord.
or
Hear what the Spirit is saying to God’s people.
Page 87 of 106

or
Hear what the Spirit is saying to the Churches.
People

Thanks be to God.

Between the Readings, a psalm, hymn, or anthem may be sung or said. Appropriate psalms are
Psalm 65
Psalm 67
Psalm 85:7-13
Psalm 98
Psalm 100
Psalm 126
Psalm 127
Psalm 133
Psalm 148
Psalm 149:1-5
Appropriate passages from the Gospels are
Matthew 5:1-16
Mark 12:28-34
Luke 6:32-38
John 15:9-17
All standing, the Deacon or Priest reads the Gospel, first saying
The Holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ according to _________.
or
The Holy Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ according to _________.
People

Glory to you, Lord Christ.

After the Gospel, the Reader says
The Gospel of the Lord.
People

Praise to you, Lord Christ.

The Sermon
The Witnessing of Promises and the Blessing of the Relationship

Page 88 of 106

The couple comes before the assembly. If there is to be a presentation, the presenters stand
with the couple, and the Presider says to them
Presider Who presents N. and N., as they seek the blessing of God and the Church on their
love and life together?
Presenters
We do.
Presider

Will you love, respect, and pray for N. and N., and do all in your power to stand
with them in the life they will share?
Presenters
We will.
The assembly stands, the couple faces the People, and the Presider addresses them, saying
Presider Will all of you gathered to witness these promises do all in your power to uphold
and honor this couple in their commitment to each other?
People
We will.
Presider
People

Will you pray for them, especially in times of trouble, and celebrate with them in
times of joy?
We will.

The People sit. The couple stands facing the Presider.
Presider N. and N., I invite you now, illumined by the Word of God and strengthened by the
prayer of this community, to make your promises before God and the Church.
Each member of the couple, in turn, takes the right hand of the other and says
In the name of God,
I, N., give myself to you, N.,
I will support and care for you by the grace of God:
in times of sickness, in times of health.
I will hold and cherish you in the love of Christ:
in times of plenty, in times of want.
I will honor and keep you with the Spirit’s help:
in times of anguish, in times of joy,
forsaking all others, as long as we both shall live.
This is my solemn promise.
or this
In the name of God,
I, N., give myself to you, N. ,
I will support and care for you:
in times of sickness, in times of health.
I will hold and cherish you:
in times of plenty, in times of want.
I will honor and keep you:
in times of anguish, in times of joy,
Page 89 of 106

forsaking all others, as long as we both shall live.
This is my solemn promise.
The Prayers
The Presider then introduces the prayers
Presider Let us pray for N. and N. in their life together
and for the concerns of this community.
A Deacon or another leader bids prayers for the couple.
Prayers for the Church and for the world, for the concerns of the local community, for those
who suffer or face trouble, and for the departed are also appropriate. If the rite takes place in
the principal Sunday worship of the congregation, the rubric concerning the Prayers of the
People on page 359 of the Book of Common Prayer is followed.
Adaptations or insertions may be made to the form that follows.
A bar in the margin indicates a bidding that may be omitted.
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader

People
Leader

People

For N. and N., seeking your blessing and the blessing of your holy people;
Loving God [or Lord, in your mercy]
Hear our prayer.
For a spirit of loving-kindness to shelter them all their days;
Loving God [or Lord, in your mercy]
Hear our prayer.
For friends to support them and communities to enfold them;
Loving God [or Lord, in your mercy]
Hear our prayer.
For peace in their home and love in their family;
Loving God [or Lord, in your mercy]
Hear our prayer.
For the grace and wisdom to care for the children you entrust to them [or may
entrust to them];
Loving God [or Lord, in your mercy]
Hear our prayer.
For the honesty to acknowledge when they hurt each other, and the humility to
seek each other’s forgiveness and yours;
Loving God [or Lord, in your mercy]
Hear our prayer.
Page 90 of 106

Leader
People

For the outpouring of your love through their work and witness;
Loving God [or Lord, in your mercy]
Hear our prayer.

The leader may add one or more of the following biddings
Leader
For all who have been reborn and made new in the waters of Baptism;
Loving God [or Lord, in your mercy]
People
Hear our prayer.
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader

People

For those who lead and serve in communities of faith;
Loving God [or Lord, in your mercy]
Hear our prayer.
For those who seek justice, peace, and concord among nations;
Loving God [or Lord, in your mercy]
Hear our prayer.
For those who are sick or suffering, homeless or poor;
Loving God [or Lord, in your mercy]
Hear our prayer.
For victims of violence and those who inflict it;
Loving God [or Lord, in your mercy]
Hear our prayer.
For communion with all who have died, [especially those whom we remember
this day];
Loving God [or Lord, in your mercy]
Hear our prayer.

The Presider concludes the Prayers with the following or another appropriate Collect
Giver of every gift, source of all goodness,
hear the prayers we bring before you for N. and N.,
who seek your blessing this day.
Strengthen them as they share in the saving work of Jesus,
and bring about for them and for all you have created
the fullness of life he promised,
who now lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.
If the Eucharist is to follow, the Lord’s Prayer is omitted here.
Leader
Leader
As our Savior Christ
And now, as our Savior
Page 91 of 106

has taught us,
we now pray,

Christ has taught us,
we are bold to say,

People and Leader

People and Leader

Our Father in heaven,
hallowed be your Name,
your kingdom come,
your will be done,
on earth as in heaven.
Give us today our daily bread.
Forgive us our sins
as we forgive those
who sin against us.
Save us from the time of trial,
and deliver us from evil.
For the kingdom, the power,
and the glory are yours,
now and for ever. Amen.

Our Father, who art in heaven,
hallowed be thy Name,
thy kingdom come,
thy will be done,
on earth as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses,
as we forgive those
who trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil.
For thine is the kingdom,
and the power, and the glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.

Blessing of the Couple
As the couple stands or kneels, the Presider invokes God’s blessing upon them, saying
Let us pray.
Most gracious God,
we praise you for the tender mercy and unfailing care
revealed to us in Jesus the Christ
and for the great joy and comfort bestowed upon us
in the gift of human love.
We give you thanks for N. and N.,
and the promise of faithfulness they have made to each other.
Pour out the abundance of your Holy Spirit upon them.
Keep them in your steadfast love;
protect them from all danger;
fill them with your wisdom and peace;
lead them in holy service to each other and the world.
The Presider continues with one of the following
God the Father,
God the Son,
God the Holy Spirit,
bless, preserve, and keep you,
Page 92 of 106

and mercifully grant you rich and boundless grace,
that you may please God in body and soul.
God make you a sign of the loving-kindness and steadfast fidelity
manifest in the life, death, and resurrection of our Savior,
and bring you at last to the delight of the heavenly banquet,
where he lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.
or this
God, the holy and undivided Trinity,
bless, preserve, and keep you,
and mercifully grant you rich and boundless grace,
that you may please God in body and soul.
God make you a sign of the loving-kindness and steadfast fidelity
manifest in the life, death, and resurrection of our Savior,
and bring you at last to the delight of the heavenly banquet,
where he lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.
The Peace
The Presider bids the Peace.
Presider The peace of the Lord be always with you.
People
And also with you.
In place of the above may be said
Presider The peace of Christ be always with you.
People
And also with you.
The liturgy continues with the Holy Communion. When the Eucharist is not celebrated, the
Presider blesses the people. The Deacon, or in the absence of a Deacon, the Priest, dismisses
them.
At the Eucharist
The liturgy continues with the Offertory, at which the couple may present the offerings of
bread and wine.
The following proper preface may be said.
Because in the giving of two people to each other in faithful love you reveal the joy and
abundant life you share with your Son Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit.
The following postcommunion prayer may be said.
God our strength and joy,
we thank you for the communion of our life together,
for the example of holy love that you give us in N. and N.,
Page 93 of 106

and for the Sacrament
of the Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ.
Grant that it may renew our hope
and nourish us for the work you set before us,
to witness to the presence of Christ in the world,
through the power of your Spirit,
and to the glory of your Name. Amen.

Page 94 of 106

VII: APPENDIX : A REVIEW OF
GENERAL CONVENTION L EGISLATION
Introduction
The legislative history here shows the development of General Convention deliberations about the place of
gay men and lesbians in the life of the Church, particularly with regard to the blessing of their faithful,
monogamous, lifelong relationships. Successive conventions have both acknowledged the work of their
predecessors and reached new decisions.
Resolution texts are from the website of the Archives of the Episcopal Church:
http://www.episcopalarchives.org/e-archives/acts/.
Minneapolis, 1976: For the first time, General Convention adopted a resolution that acknowledged and
affirmed the presence of persons of homosexual orientation in the Church.
Resolution 1976–A069:
Resolved, the House of Bishops concurring, That it is the sense of this General Convention that
homosexual persons are children of God who have a full and equal claim with all other persons
upon the love, acceptance, and pastoral concern and care of the Church.
Anaheim, 1985: General Convention reaffirmed the 1976 resolution and encouraged dioceses to deepen
understanding.
Resolution 1985–D082:
Resolved, the House of Bishops concurring, That the 68th General Convention urge each
diocese of this Church to find an effective way to foster a better understanding of homosexual
persons, to dispel myths and prejudices about homosexuality, to provide pastoral support, and
to give life to the claim of homosexual persons “upon the love, acceptance, and pastoral care
and concern of the Church  as recognized by the General Convention in 1976.
Phoenix, 1991: General Convention affirmed the traditional understanding of marriage as between a man and
a woman, and acknowledged “discontinuity  between that teaching and the experience of many members of
the Episcopal Church.
Resolution 1991–A104:
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That the 70th General Convention of the Episcopal
Church affirms that the teaching of the Episcopal Church is that physical sexual expression is
appropriate only within the lifelong monogamous “union of husband and wife in heart, body,
and mind  “intended by God for their mutual joy; for the help and comfort given one another
in prosperity and adversity and, when it is God’s will, for the procreation of children and their
nurture in the knowledge and love of the Lord  as set forth in the Book of Common Prayer;
and be it further
Page 95 of 106

Resolved, That this Church continues to work to reconcile the discontinuity between this
teaching and the experience of many members of this body; and be it further
Resolved, That this General Convention confesses our failure to lead and to resolve this
discontinuity through legislative efforts based upon resolutions directed at singular and
various aspects of these issues; and be it further
Resolved, That this General Convention commissions the Bishops and members of each
Diocesan Deputation to initiate a means for all congregations in their jurisdiction to enter into
dialogue and deepen their understanding of these complex issues; and further this General
Convention directs the President of each Province to appoint one Bishop, one lay deputy and
one clerical deputy in that province to facilitate the process, to receive reports from the
dioceses at each meeting of their provincial synod and report to the 71st General Convention;
and be it further
Resolved, That this General Convention directs the House of Bishops to prepare a Pastoral
Teaching prior to the 71st General Convention using the learnings from the diocesan and
provincial processes and calling upon such insight as is necessary from theologians, theological
ethicists, social scientists and gay and lesbian persons; and that three lay persons and three
members of the clergy from the House of Deputies, appointed by the President of the House
of Deputies be included in the preparation of this Pastoral Teaching.
Indianapolis, 1994: General Convention added sexual orientation, along with marital status, sex, disabilities,
and age as categories to which non-discrimination in Church membership is assured.
Resolution 1994–C020:
Resolved, the House of Bishops concurring, That Title I, Canon 17, Section 5 be amended as
follows:
No person shall be denied rights, status [in], or [access to] an equal place in
the life, worship, and governance of this Church because of race, color, [or]
ethnic origin, national origin, marital status, sex, sexual orientation, disabilities
or age, except as otherwise specified by [this] Canon.
Indianapolis, 1994: General Convention called for a study of “the theological foundations and pastoral
considerations involved in the development of rites honoring love and commitment between persons of the
same sex. 
Resolution 1994–C042:
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That the 71st General Convention direct the
Standing Liturgical Commission and the Theology Committee of the House of Bishops to
prepare and present to the 72nd General Convention, as part of the Church’s ongoing dialogue
on human sexuality, a report addressing the theological foundations and pastoral
considerations involved in the development of rites honoring love and commitment between
persons of the same sex; and be it further
Resolved, That no rites for the honoring of love and commitment between persons of the same
sex be developed unless and until the preparation of such rites has been authorized by the
General Convention; and be it further
Resolved, That the sum of $8,600 be appropriated to support this work, subject to funding
considerations.

Page 96 of 106

Philadelphia, 1997: General Convention reaffirmed the traditional understanding of marriage and called for
continuing study.
Resolution 1997–C003:
Resolved, That this 72nd General Convention affirm the sacredness of Christian marriage
between one man and one woman with intent of life-long relationship; and be it further
Resolved, That this Convention direct the Standing Liturgical Commission to continue its study
of theological aspects of committed relationships of same-sex couples, and to issue a full
report including recommendations of future steps for the resolution of issues related to such
committed relationships no later than November 1999 for consideration at the 73rd General
Convention.
Denver, 2000: General Convention acknowledged relationships other than marriage.
Resolution 2000–D039:
Resolved, That the members of the 73rd General Convention intend for this Church to provide
a safe and just structure in which all can utilize their gifts and creative energies for mission; and
be it further
Resolved, That we acknowledge that while the issues of human sexuality are not yet resolved,
there are currently couples in the Body of Christ and in this Church who are living in marriage
and couples in the Body of Christ and in this Church who are living in other life-long committed
relationships; and be it further
Resolved, That we expect such relationships will be characterized by fidelity, monogamy,
mutual affection and respect, careful, honest communication, and the holy love which enables
those in such relationships to see in each other the image of God; and be it further
Resolved, That we denounce promiscuity, exploitation, and abusiveness in the relationships of
any of our members; and be it further
Resolved, That this Church intends to hold all its members accountable to these values, and will
provide for them the prayerful support, encouragement, and pastoral care necessary to live
faithfully by them; and be it further
Resolved, That we acknowledge that some, acting in good conscience, who disagree with the
traditional teaching of the Church on human sexuality, will act in contradiction to that position;
and be it further
Resolved, That in continuity with previous actions of the General Convention of this Church,
and in response to the call for dialogue by the Lambeth Conference, we affirm that those on
various sides of controversial issues have a place in the Church, and we reaffirm the imperative
to promote conversation between persons of differing experiences and perspectives, while
acknowledging the Church’s teaching on the sanctity of marriage.
Minneapolis, 2003: Acknowledging continuing differences, General Convention recognized “that local faith
communities are operating within the bounds of our common life as they explore and experience liturgies
celebrating and blessing same-sex unions. 
Resolution 2003–C051:
Resolved, That the 74th General Convention affirm the following:

Page 97 of 106

1. That our life together as a community of faith is grounded in the saving work of Jesus Christ
and expressed in the principles of the Chicago–Lambeth Quadrilateral: Holy Scripture, the
historic Creeds of the Church, the two dominical Sacraments, and the Historic Episcopate.
2. That we reaffirm Resolution A069 of the 65th General Convention (1976) that “homosexual
persons are children of God who have a full and equal claim with all other persons upon the
love, acceptance, and pastoral concern and care of the Church. 
3. That, in our understanding of homosexual persons, differences exist among us about how
best to care pastorally for those who intend to live in monogamous, non-celibate unions; and
what is, or should be, required, permitted, or prohibited by the doctrine, discipline, and
worship of The Episcopal Church concerning the blessing of the same.
4. That we reaffirm Resolution D039 of the 73rd General Convention (2000), that “We expect
such relationships will be characterized by fidelity, monogamy, mutual affection and respect,
careful, honest communication, and the holy love which enables those in such relationships to
see in each other the image of God,  and that such relationships exist throughout the church.
5. That we recognize that local faith communities are operating within the bounds of our
common life as they explore and experience liturgies celebrating and blessing same-sex
unions.
6. That we commit ourselves, and call our church, in the spirit of Resolution A104 of the 70th
General Convention (1991), to continued prayer, study, and discernment on the pastoral care
for gay and lesbian persons, to include the compilation and development by a special
commission organized and appointed by the Presiding Bishop, of resources to facilitate as
wide a conversation of discernment as possible throughout the church.
7. That our baptism into Jesus Christ is inseparable from our communion with one another,
and we commit ourselves to that communion despite our diversity of opinion and, among
dioceses, a diversity of pastoral practice with the gay men and lesbians among us.
8. That it is a matter of faith that our Lord longs for our unity as his disciples, and for us this
entails living within the boundaries of the Constitution and Canons of The Episcopal Church.
We believe this discipline expresses faithfulness to our polity and that it will facilitate the
conversation we seek, not only in The Episcopal Church, but also in the wider Anglican
Communion and beyond.
Anaheim, 2009: The General Convention directed the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music to “collect
and develop theological and liturgical resources  for blessing same-gender relationships.
Resolution 2009–C056:
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That the 76th General Convention acknowledge
the changing circumstances in the United States and in other nations, as legislation authorizing
or forbidding marriage, civil unions or domestic partnerships for gay and lesbian persons is
passed in various civil jurisdictions that call forth a renewed pastoral response from this
Church, and for an open process for the consideration of theological and liturgical resources
for the blessing of same-gender relationships; and be it further
Resolved, That the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music, in consultation with the House
of Bishops, collect and develop theological and liturgical resources, and report to the 77th
General Convention; and be it further

Page 98 of 106

Resolved, That the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music, in consultation with the House
of Bishops, devise an open process for the conduct of its work inviting participation from
provinces, dioceses, congregations, and individuals who are engaged in such theological work,
and inviting theological reflection from throughout the Anglican Communion; and be it further
Resolved, That bishops, particularly those in dioceses within civil jurisdictions where samegender marriage, civil unions, or domestic partnerships are legal, may provide generous
pastoral response to meet the needs of members of this Church; and be it further
Resolved, That this Convention honor the theological diversity of this Church in regard to
matters of human sexuality; and be it further
Resolved, That the members of this Church be encouraged to engage in this effort.
Indianapolis, 2012: In Resolution A049, the General Convention commended the resource “I Will Bless You,
and You Will Be a Blessing  for study and use, authorized the liturgy for provisional use, and called for a
process of review and further development of the theological resources. In addition, in Resolution A050, the
General Convention called for a task force to explore understandings of marriage, including attention to
legislation authorizing or forbidding same-sex marriage.
Resolution 2012–A049
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That the 77th General Convention commend
“Liturgical Resources I: I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing  for study and use in
congregations and dioceses of The Episcopal Church, with the following revisions:
Throughout “I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing  change “same-gender  to “samesex 
Blue Book p. 184: change “Resources for Blessing Same-Gender Relationships  to “Resources
for The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant in a Same-Sex Relationship 
Blue Book p. 240: Add rubric after first rubric, stating: “At least one of the couple must be a
baptized Christian. 
Blue Book p. 240: In paragraph 2, line 1, delete “at least one of whom is baptized 
Blue Book p. 241: In Presider’s address to the assembly, delete “come what may  (paragraph
1, line 9)
Blue Book pp. 241–242: In Presider’s address to the assembly, delete all of paragraph 2
(“Ahead of them ... calls us all to share. )
Blue Book p. 242: In Presider’s address to the assembly, change “let us pray, then, 
(paragraph 3, line 1) to “Therefore, in the name of Christ, let us pray. 
Blue Book p. 245: After the bidding for peace in their home and love in their family, add the
following bidding: “For the grace, when they hurt each other, to recognize and acknowledge
their fault, and to seek each other’s forgiveness and yours: Lord, in your mercy (or Lord, in
your goodness) Hear our prayer. 
Blue Book p. 246: Change rubric that begins “After a time of silence  to the following: “The
leader may add one or more of the following biddings. 
Blue Book p. 247: In Commitment (both forms) line 7, change “I will honor and keep you  to
“I will honor and love you 
Blue Book p. 248: In first form of blessing rings, change line 2 to “as signs of the enduring
covenant 
Page 99 of 106

Blue Book p. 248: In Blessing of the Couple, add rubric between first and second paragraphs:
“The Presider continues with one of the following 
Blue Book p. 248: In Blessing of the Couple, add third paragraph after the “Amen : “or this /
God, the holy and undivided Trinity, bless, preserve, and keep you, and mercifully grant you
rich and boundless grace, that you may please God in body and soul. God make you a sign of
the loving-kindness and steadfast fidelity manifest in the life, death, and resurrection of our
Savior, and bring you at last to the delight of the heavenly banquet, where he lives and reigns
for ever and ever. Amen. 
Blue Book p. 257: In paragraph under E. Vocation, change “1 Samuel 18  to “1 Samuel 3 ; and
be it further
Resolved, That the 77th General Convention authorize for provisional use “The Witnessing and
Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant  from “Liturgical Resources I: I Will Bless You and You Will Be
a Blessing  beginning the First Sunday of Advent 2012, under the direction and subject to the
permission of the bishop exercising ecclesiastical authority; and be it further
Resolved, That bishops, particularly those in dioceses within civil jurisdictions where same-sex
marriage, civil unions, or domestic partnerships are legal, may provide generous pastoral
response to meet the needs of members of this Church; and be it further
Resolved, That bishops may authorize adaptation of these materials to meet the needs of
members of this Church: and be it further
Resolved, that the provision of Canon I.18.4 applies by extension to “Theological Resources for
Blessing Same-Sex Relationships,  namely, “It shall be within the discretion of any Member of
the Clergy of this Church to decline to  preside at any rite of blessing defined herein; and be it
further
Resolved, That this convention honor the theological diversity of this church in regard to
matters of human sexuality, and that no bishop, priest, deacon or lay person should be coerced
or penalized in any manner, nor suffer any canonical disabilities, as a result of his or her
conscientious objection to or support for the 77th General Convention’s action with regard to
the Blessing of Same-Sex Relationships; and be it further
Resolved, That the theological resource for the blessing of a lifelong covenant be further
developed by the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music over the 2013–2015 triennium
with specific attention to further engagement with scripture and the relevant categories and
sources of systematic theology (e.g., creation, sin, grace, salvation, redemption, human
nature); and be it further
Resolved, That the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music include the work of diverse
theological perspectives in the further development of the theological resource; and be it
further
Resolved, That the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music develop an open process to
review “I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing,  inviting responses from provinces,
dioceses, congregations, and individuals from throughout The Episcopal Church and the
Anglican Communion, and from our ecumenical partners, and report to the 78th General
Convention.
Resolution 2012–A050

Page 100 of 106

Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That the 77th General Convention direct the
Presiding Bishop and President of the House of Deputies to appoint a task force of not more
than twelve people, consisting of theologians, liturgists, pastors, and educators, to identify
and explore biblical, theological, historical, liturgical, and canonical dimensions of marriage;
and be it further,
Resolved, That the task force consult with the Standing Commission on Constitution and
Canons and The Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music to address the pastoral need for
priests to officiate at a civil marriage of a same-sex couple in states that authorize such; and
be it further
Resolved, That the task force consult with couples living in marriage and in other lifelong
committed relationships and with single adults, and be it further,
Resolved, That the task force consult with other churches in the Anglican Communion and with
our ecumenical partners, and be it further
Resolved, That the task force consider issues raised by changing societal and cultural norms
and legal structures, including legislation authorizing or forbidding marriage, civil unions, or
domestic partnerships between two people of the same sex, in the U.S. and other countries
where The Episcopal Church is located; and be it further
Resolved, That the task force develop tools for theological reflection and norms for theological
discussion at a local level; and be it further
Resolved, That the task force report its progress to the 78th General Convention; and be it
further
Resolved, That the General Convention request the Joint Standing Committee on Program,
Budget and Finance to consider a budget allocation of $30,000 for the implementation of this
resolution.
Salt Lake City, 2015: In Resolution A054, the General Convention authorized two liturgies for marriage for
trial use and the use of “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant,  thus allowing the marriage of
same-sex couples in civil jurisdictions where such marriages are legal. In addition, Resolution A036 revised
the marriage canon (Canon I.18; the revised text appears above in Appendix 2), and Resolution A037
requested dioceses and parishes to use the study materials produced by the Task Force on the Study of
Marriage established by the 2012 Convention, and called for an expanded task force to continue to study
marriage.
Resolution 2015-A036:
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That Canon I.18 is hereby amended to read as follows:
CANON 18: Of the Solemnization of Holy Matrimony
Canon 18: Of the Celebration and Blessing of Marriage
Sec. 1. Every Member of the Clergy of this Church shall conform to the laws of the State governing
the creation of the civil status of marriage, and also to the laws of this Church governing these canons
concerning the solemnization of marriage Holy Matrimony. Members of the Clergy may solemnize a
marriage using any of the liturgical forms authorized by this Church.
Page 101 of 106

Sec. 2. Before solemnizing a marriage the Member of the Clergy shall have ascertained:
(a) That both parties have the right to contract a marriage according to the laws of the State.
(b) That both parties understand that Holy Matrimony is a physical and spiritual union of a man and a
woman, entered into within the community of faith, by mutual consent of heart, mind, and will, and
with intent that it be lifelong.
(c) That both parties freely and knowingly consent to such marriage, without fraud, coercion,
mistake as to identity of a partner, or mental reservation.
(d) That at least one of the parties has received Holy Baptism.
(e) That both parties have been instructed as to the nature, meaning, and purpose of Holy
Matrimony by the Member of the Clergy, or that they have both received such instruction from
persons known by the Member of the Clergy to be competent and responsible.
Sec. 2. The couple shall notify the Member of the Clergy of their intent to marry at least thirty days prior
to the solemnization; Provided, that if one of the parties is a member of the Congregation of the
Member of the Clergy, or both parties can furnish satisfactory evidence of the need for shortening the
time, this requirement can be waived for weighty cause; in which case the Member of the Clergy shall
immediately report this action in writing to the Bishop.
Sec. 3. No Member of the Clergy of this Church shall solemnize any marriage unless the following
procedures are complied with:
(a) The intention of the parties to contract marriage shall have been signified to the Member of the
Clergy at least thirty days before the service of solemnization; Provided, that for weighty cause, this
requirement may be dispensed with if one of the parties is a member of the Congregation of the
Member of the Clergy, or can furnish satisfactory evidence of responsibility. In case the thirty days'
notice is waived, the Member of the Clergy shall report such action in writing to the Bishop
immediately.
(b) There shall be present at least two witnesses to the solemnization of marriage.
(c) The Member of the Clergy shall record in the proper register the date and place of the marriage,
the names of the parties and their parents, the age of the parties, their residences, and their Church
status; the witnesses and the Member of the Clergy shall sign the record.
(d) The Member of the Clergy shall have required that the parties sign the following declaration:
(e) "We, A.B. and C.D., desiring to receive the blessing of Holy Matrimony in the Church, do solemnly
declare that we hold marriage to be a lifelong union of husband and wife as it is set forth in the Book
of Common Prayer.
(f) "We believe that the union of husband and wife, in heart, body, and mind, is intended by God for
their mutual joy; for the help and comfort given one another in prosperity and adversity; and, when it
is God's will, for the procreation of children and their nurture in the knowledge and love of the Lord.
Page 102 of 106

(g) "And we do engage ourselves, so far as in us lies, to make our utmost effort to establish this
relationship and to seek God's help thereto."
Sec. 3. Prior to the solemnization, the Member of the Clergy shall determine:
(a) that both parties have the right to marry according to the laws of the State and consent to do so
freely, without fraud, coercion, mistake as to the identity of either, or mental reservation; and
(b) that at least one of the parties is baptized; and
(c) that both parties have been instructed by the Member of the Clergy, or a person known by the
Member of the Clergy to be competent and responsible, in the nature, purpose, and meaning, as well as
the rights, duties and responsibilities of marriage.
Sec. 4. Prior to the solemnization, the parties shall sign the following Declaration of Intention:
We understand the teaching of the church that God's purpose for our marriage is for our mutual joy, for
the help and comfort we will give to each other in prosperity and adversity, and, when it is God's will, for
the gift and heritage of children and their nurture in the knowledge and love of God. We also
understand that our marriage is to be unconditional, mutual, exclusive, faithful, and lifelong; and we
engage to make the utmost effort to accept these gifts and fulfill these duties, with the help of God and
the support of our community.
Sec. 5. At least two witnesses shall be present at the solemnization, and together with the Member of
the Clergy and the parties, sign the record of the solemnization in the proper register; which record shall
include the date and place of the solemnization, the names of the witnesses, the parties and their
parents, the age of the parties, Church status, and residence(s).
Sec. 6. A bishop or priest may pronounce a blessing upon a civil marriage using any of the liturgical
forms authorized by this Church.
Sec. 4Sec. 7. It shall be within the discretion of any Member of the Clergy of this Church to decline to
solemnize or bless any marriage.
and be it further
Resolved that this canon shall become effective on the First Sunday of Advent, 2015.

Resolution 2015-A037:
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That the 78th General Convention requests dioceses and
parishes use the study materials on marriage provided in the last triennium by the Task Force on the
Study of Marriage, namely the “Dearly Beloved  toolkit and the appended essays in their Blue Book
report to this Convention; and be it further
Resolved, That the 78th General Convention directs the Presiding Bishop and President of the House
of Deputies to appoint jointly an expanded Task Force on the Study of Marriage to continue this
work, consisting of not more than 15 people, including theologians, ethicists, pastors, liturgists, and
Page 103 of 106

educators, who represent the cultural and theological diversity in the Church; membership should
include some of the Task Force on the Study of Marriage appointed in 2012, some from dioceses
outside the United States, and young adults; and be it further
Resolved, That the Task Force explore further those contemporary trends and norms identified by
the Task Force on the Study of Marriage in the previous triennium, specifically regarding those who
choose to remain single; unmarried persons in intimate relationships; couples who cohabitate either
in preparation for, or as an alternative to, marriage; couples who desire a blessing from the Church
but not marriage; parenting by single or and/or unmarried persons; differing forms of family and
household such as those including same-sex parenting, adoption, and racial diversity; and differences
in marriage patterns between ethnic and racial groups; and be it further
Resolved, That the Task Force consult with (i) individuals and couples within these groups about their
experience of faith and church life; and (ii) the results of diocesan and parochial study of "Dearly
Beloved" toolkit; and be it further
Resolved, That the Task Force explore biblical, theological, moral, liturgical, cultural, and pastoral
perspectives on these matters, and develop written materials about them which represent the
spectrum of understanding in our Church and which include responses from theologians, ethicists,
pastors, liturgists, social scientists, and educators who are not members of the expanded Task Force,
and whose perspectives represent the spectrum of understandings on these matters in our Church;
and be it further
Resolved, That the Task Force study and monitor, in consultation with the Standing Commission on
Liturgy and Music, the impact of same-sex marriage and rites of blessing on our Church; the
continuing debate about clergy acting as agents of the state in officiating at marriages; and any
other matters related to marriage by action of or referral by this Convention; and be it further
Resolved, That the Task Force report and make recommendations to the 79th General Convention;
and be it further
Resolved, That the Task Force provide educational and pastoral resources for congregational use on
these matters that represents the spectrum of understandings on these matters in our Church; and
be it further
Resolved, That the General Convention request the Joint Standing Committee on Program, Budget
and Finance to consider a budget allocation of $90,000 for the implementation of this resolution.
Resolution 2015-A054:
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That the 78th General Convention commend “Liturgical
Resources I: I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing, Revised and Expanded 2015,  as found in the
Blue Book, Liturgy Supplemental Materials: Appendices of the Report of the Standing Commission
on Liturgy and Music (BBLSM), pp. 2-151, with the following revisions:
BBLSM p. 84: In The Commitment, change the rubric to read “Each member of the couple, in
turn, takes the right hand of the other and says 
BBLSM p.84: After “I N., give myself to you, N.  add “, and take you to myself. 
BBLSM p. 85: At the Pronouncement, change the rubric to read “The Presider joins the right
hands and says 

Page 104 of 106

BBLSM p. 87: In Concerning the Service, change the second paragraph to read “At least one
of the couple must be a baptized Christian, and the marriage shall conform to the laws of the
state and canons of this church."
BBLSM p. 88: Under Gathering, change the rubric to read “The couple joins the assembly. 
BBLSM p. 89: Change “In marriage according to the laws of the state [or civil jurisdiction] of
X  to “In marriage [according to the laws of the state or civil jurisdiction of X] 
BBLSM p. 89: Change “Solemnize their marriage according to the laws of the state [or civil
jurisdiction] of X  to “are married [according to the laws of the state or civil jurisdiction of
X] 
BBLSM p.94: After “I N., give myself to you, N.  add “, and take you to myself. 
BBLSM p. 95: At the Pronouncement, change the rubric to read “The Presider joins the right
hands of the couple and says 
BBLSM p. 95: Replace “I pronounce that they are married according to the laws of the state
[or civil jurisdiction] of X  to “I pronounce that they are married [according to the laws of the
state or civil jurisdiction of X] 
BBLSM p. 100: At The Marriage, change the rubric to read “Each member of the couple, in
turn, takes the right hand of the other and says 
for study and use in congregations and dioceses of The Episcopal Church; and be it further
Resolved, That the 78th General Convention authorize for use “The Witnessing and Blessing of a
Lifelong Covenant  from “Liturgical Resources I: I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing, Revised
and Expanded 2015  (as found in Supplemental Materials: Appendices of the Report of the Standing
Commission on Liturgy and Music, pp. 77-86, as amended)  beginning the First Sunday of Advent
2015; under the direction and with the permission of the bishop exercising ecclesiastical authority;
and be it further
Resolved, That the 78th General Convention authorize for trial use in accordance with Article X of the
Constitution and Canon II.3.6 “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Marriage,  and “The Celebration and
Blessing of a Marriage 2,  from “Liturgical Resources I: I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing,
Revised and Expanded 2015  (as found in Supplemental Materials: Appendices of the Report of the
Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music, pp. 87-105) beginning the First Sunday of Advent
2015. Bishops exercising ecclesiastical authority or, where appropriate, ecclesiastical supervision will
make provision for all couples asking to be married in this Church to have access to these liturgies.
Trial use is only to be available under the direction and with the permission of the Diocesan Bishop;
and be it further
Resolved, That bishops may continue to provide generous pastoral response to meet the needs of
members of this Church; and be it further
Resolved, That the provision of Canon I.18.4* applies by extension to “Liturgical Resources I: I Will
Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing, Revised and Expanded 2015,  namely, “It shall be within the
discretion of any Member of the Clergy of this Church to decline to  preside at any rite contained
herein; and be it further
Resolved, That the provisions of Canon I.19.3 regarding marriage after divorce apply equally to all the
rites of “Liturgical Resources I: I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing, Revised and Expanded
2015,  in accordance with guidelines established by each diocese; and be it further

Page 105 of 106

Resolved, That this convention honor the theological diversity of this Church in regard to matters of
human sexuality; and that no bishop, priest, deacon or lay person should be coerced or penalized in
any manner, nor suffer any canonical disabilities, as a result of his or her theological objection to or
support for the 78th General Convention’s action contained in this resolution; and be it further
Resolved, That the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music continue to monitor the use of this
material and report to the 79th General Convention; and be it further
Resolved, That the 78th General Convention direct the Secretary of General Convention, and the
Custodian of the Standard Book of Common Prayer in consultation with the outgoing Chair of the
Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music and the Chairs of the Legislative Committees to whom
this legislation is referred, to finalize and arrange for the publication with Church Publishing of the
material (in English and Spanish) contained in “Liturgical Resources 1: I Will Bless You and You Will Be
a Blessing, Revised and Expanded 2015  as approved by the 78th General Convention, no later than
the first Sunday of Advent 2015, these materials to be available electronically at no cost.

*Canon I.18.4 refers to the 2012 Constitution and Canons; a comparable provision is contained in Canon I.18.7 of
the 2015 Constitution and Canons.

Page 106 of 106

 id="file23242705" filename="5-10.htm" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.biblehub.com/matthew/5-10.htm">
 New International Version Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 New Living Translation God blesses those who are persecuted for doing right, for the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs. 
 English Standard Version “Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 Berean Study Bible Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 Berean Literal Bible Blessed are those having been persecuted on account of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of the heavens. 
 King James Bible Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 New King James Version Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, For theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 New American Standard Bible “Blessed are those who have been persecuted for the sake of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 NASB 1995 “Blessed are those who have been persecuted for the sake of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 NASB 1977 “Blessed are those who have been persecuted for the sake of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 Amplified Bible “Blessed [comforted by inner peace and God’s love] are those who are persecuted for doing that which is morally right, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven [both now and forever]. 
 Christian Standard Bible Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for the kingdom of heaven is theirs. 
 Holman Christian Standard Bible Those who are persecuted for righteousness are blessed, for the kingdom of heaven is theirs. 
 American Standard Version Blessed are they that have been persecuted for righteousness'sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 Aramaic Bible in Plain English Blessed are those who have been persecuted for the cause of righteousness, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. 
 Contemporary English Version God blesses those people who are treated badly for doing right. They belong to the kingdom of heaven. 
 Douay-Rheims Bible Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 English Revised Version Blessed are they that have been persecuted for righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 Good News Translation "Happy are those who are persecuted because they do what God requires; the Kingdom of heaven belongs to them! 
 GOD'S WORD® Translation Blessed are those who are persecuted for doing what God approves of. The kingdom of heaven belongs to them. 
 International Standard Version "How blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake, because the kingdom from heaven belongs to them! 
 Literal Standard Version Blessed those persecuted for righteousness’ sake—because theirs is the kingdom of the heavens. 
 NET Bible "Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to them. 
 New Heart English Bible Blessed are those who have been persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 Weymouth New Testament "Blessed are those who have borne persecution in the cause of Righteousness, for to them belongs the Kingdom of the Heavens. 
 World English Bible Blessed are those who have been persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. 
 Young's Literal Translation 'Happy those persecuted for righteousness' sake -- because theirs is the reign of the heavens. 
 Isaiah 66:5 You who tremble at His word, hear the word of the LORD: "Your brothers who hate you and exclude you because of My name have said, 'Let the LORD be glorified that we may see your joy!' But they will be put to shame." 
 Matthew 5:3 "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 Matthew 19:14 But Jesus said, "Let the little children come to Me, and do not hinder them! For the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these." 
 Matthew 25:34 Then the King will say to those on His right, 'Come, you who are blessed by My Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. 
 Mark 10:14 But when Jesus saw this, He was indignant and told them, "Let the little children come to Me, and do not hinder them! For the kingdom of God belongs to such as these. 
 Luke 6:20 Looking up at His disciples, Jesus said: "Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God. 
 Luke 22:29 And I bestow on you a kingdom, just as My Father has bestowed one on Me, 
 Matthew 10:23 But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another: for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come. 
 Psalm 37:12 The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. 
 Mark 10:30 But he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life. 
 for. 
 Matthew 5:3 Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 2 Thessalonians 1:4-7 So that we ourselves glory in you in the churches of God for your patience and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure: … 
 James 1:12 Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him. 
 (10) Persecuted for righteousness sake.--Here again there is a profound significance in the order. The work of the peacemakers is not a light and easy work. Often, as of old, when we "labour for peace," men "make them ready for battle" (Psalm 120:7); but not the less is the blessing sure to follow. Amid seeming failure or seeming success, those who are persecuted, not for opinions, but for right conduct, the true martyrs and confessors of righteousness, attain their reward at last. There is something suggestive in the fact that the last promise is the same as the first. We end, as we began, with "the kingdom of heaven;" but the path by which we have been led leads us to see that that includes all the intermediate blessings, of which at first it seemed but the prelude and beginning. 
 Verse 10. - Which are persecuted; which have been persecuted (Revised Version); οἱ δεδιωγμένοι. "Those who are harassed, hunted, spoiled. The term is properly used of wild beasts pursued by hunters, or of an enemy or malefactor in flight" (Wetstein). Our Lord, by the use of the perfect, wishes to indicate 
 (1) the fact that they have endured persecution, and still stand firm; and probably 
 (2) the condition of temporal loss to which they have been reduced by such persecution. They have "suffered the loss," possibly, "of all things," but they are "blessed." For righteouness' sake (ἕνεκεν δικαιοσύνης). No article (contrast ver. 6), either as indicating that for even a part of righteousness persecution can be undergone, or, and more probably, simply dwelling on the cause of persecution without idealizing it. St. Peter also says, perhaps with a reference to our Lord's words, that they who suffer διὰ δικαιοσύνην are μακάριοι (1 Peter 3:14). For theirs is the kingdom of heaven. The same promise that was given to "the poor in spirit" (ver. 3) is here given to the persecuted for righteousness' sake. In the former case, poverty in the sphere of the spirit obtains the fullest possessions; here the same promise is given to temporal loss produced by faithfulness to the cause of righteousness. In ver. 3 our Lord removed all occasion for intellectual and spiritual pride. Here he comforts for temporal and social losses (cf. especially 2 Corinthians 6:10; further see ver. 3, note). Clement of Alexandria, 'Strom.,' 4:6 (p. 582, Potter) 
 (1) confuses this and the preceding Beatitude; . . . 
 Blessed [are] Μακάριοι (Makarioi) Adjective - Nominative Masculine Plural Strong's 3107: Happy, blessed, to be envied. A prolonged form of the poetical makar; supremely blest; by extension, fortunate, well off. 
 those who οἱ (hoi) Article - Nominative Masculine Plural Strong's 3588: The, the definite article. Including the feminine he, and the neuter to in all their inflections; the definite article; the. 
 are persecuted δεδιωγμένοι (dediōgmenoi) Verb - Perfect Participle Middle or Passive - Nominative Masculine Plural Strong's 1377: To pursue, hence: I persecute. A prolonged form of a primary verb dio; to pursue; by implication, to persecute. 
 because of ἕνεκεν (heneken) Preposition Strong's 1752: Or heneken hen'-ek-en or heineken hi'-nek-en; of uncertain affinity; on account of. 
 righteousness, δικαιοσύνης (dikaiosynēs) Noun - Genitive Feminine Singular Strong's 1343: From dikaios; equity; specially justification. 
 for Ὅτι (Hoti) Conjunction Strong's 3754: Neuter of hostis as conjunction; demonstrative, that; causative, because. 
 theirs αὐτῶν (autōn) Personal / Possessive Pronoun - Genitive Masculine 3rd Person Plural Strong's 846: He, she, it, they, them, same. From the particle au; the reflexive pronoun self, used of the third person, and of the other persons. 
 is ἐστιν (estin) Verb - Present Indicative Active - 3rd Person Singular Strong's 1510: I am, exist. The first person singular present indicative; a prolonged form of a primary and defective verb; I exist. 
 the ἡ (hē) Article - Nominative Feminine Singular Strong's 3588: The, the definite article. Including the feminine he, and the neuter to in all their inflections; the definite article; the. 
 kingdom βασιλεία (basileia) Noun - Nominative Feminine Singular Strong's 932: From basileus; properly, royalty, i.e. rule, or a realm. 
 of τῶν (tōn) Article - Genitive Masculine Plural Strong's 3588: The, the definite article. Including the feminine he, and the neuter to in all their inflections; the definite article; the. 
 heaven. οὐρανῶν (ouranōn) Noun - Genitive Masculine Plural Strong's 3772: Perhaps from the same as oros; the sky; by extension, heaven; by implication, happiness, power, eternity; specially, the Gospel. 

 id="file23242800" filename="8" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zdcbcj6/revision/8">
 Accessibility links 
 Practices in Christianity 
 Christians engage in a variety of practices that help them to live according to their faith. These include private and public worship, works of charity and, for some, pilgrimage to holy sites. 
 Rites of passage 
 The main function of a local church is as a place for Christians to worship together. Most churches hold services every Sunday and throughout the week, and also welcome visitors to engage in private prayer. Rites of passage, such as baptisms, marriages and funerals, are held in local churches. This important function of churches enables whole communities to be involved in these celebrations in the lives of Christians. 
 Marriage 
 Marriage is an important rite of passage that is seen by many Christians as the foundation of family life. 
 Christian wedding ceremonies 
 Many Christians marry in church, surrounded by family and friends. Christian wedding ceremonies reflect Christian ideas about the purpose of marriage and have features that are of great religious and spiritual importance, including: 
 The congregation sing hymns and say prayers to thank and praise God and ask for his blessing on the couple. 
 The priest gives a sermon on the theme of love and self-sacrifice. 
 Rings are exchanged, symbolising eternal love and that marriage is a lifelong commitment. 
 The couple make important promises, called vows, to stay committed to each other. 
 The couple sign the marriage register, which is required by law in the UK. 
 A couple may choose to change some elements of the marriage ceremony. For example, some couples choose to omit the traditional vow where a bride promises to ‘honour and obey’ her husband. Instead, they might choose to use words that show a more equal partnership. 
 Some churches perform same-sex marriages, while some churches, such as the Roman Catholic Church, do not marry couples of the same sex. 
 The meaning and purpose of marriage 
 ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.’ This is a profound mystery – but I am talking about Christ and the church. However, each one of you also must love his wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband.Ephesians 5:31–3 
 In these verses from the Bible, St Paul teaches that a married couple become ‘one flesh’, meaning that the union is a lifelong commitment, with the wife being obedient to her husband. According to this teaching, the husband should care for the wife just as God cares for the people of the Church. The idea of a husband being in charge of his wife is viewed by many Christians as contradictory to gender equality. They instead believe that both partners in a marriage should love and respect each other equally, with neither being in charge of the other. 
 Funerals 
 A very important function of a local church is as a place where funerals are conducted. In the Gospel of John, Jesus says: I am the resurrection and the life. The one who believes in me will live, even though they die (John 11:25). For this reason, Christian funerals, although sad for those who mourn the person who has died, are often seen as ‘celebrations of life’ because this person’s soul is believed to be joining God in Heaven. 
 Christian funerals differ according to denomination and specific beliefs about the afterlife. Some Christians believe in the resurrection of the body, so they prefer burial over cremation, which destroys the body. This is because the Apostles’ Creed says: I believe in … the resurrection of the body. 
 However, some Christians believe that resurrection will be spiritual, as St Paul stated in a letter in the Bible (1 Corinthians 15:44). For these Christians, both cremation and burial are acceptable. 
 Christian funerals bring comfort and hope of salvation to the friends and family of the deceased person. Practices that help to bring this comfort and hope include: 
 singing hymns and saying set prayers to thank and praise God 
 using flowers to decorate the church and the coffin 
 using candles to remind mourners that Jesus is the ‘light of the world’ 
 praying for the deceased person’s soul (Catholic Christians) 
 Question 
 What term could be used to describe baptisms, marriages and funerals? 
 Reveal answer 
 Rites of passage. These are ceremonies that mark a person moving from one phase of life to another. 

 id="file23242805" filename="about-crossing-oneself.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.orthodox.net/articles/about-crossing-oneself.html">
 Why do Orthodox Christians "cross themselves" different than Roman Catholics? 
 They touch their right shoulder first, then their left, whereas the Roman Catholics first touch their left shoulder. Is this difference important? Does it make any difference? 
 Orthodox cross themselves from right to left. first we will describe the mechanics of making the cross, then explain why it is indeed important that we make the sign of the cross correctly. 
 "Placing the cross on oneself" 
 We place our thumb and first two fingers together in a point, and our last we fingers flat against our palm. The three fingers together represent the Holy Trinity - Father, Son and Holy Spirit, and the two fingers in the palm represent the two natures of Christ. 
 We touch our forehead, then our belly, tracing the vertical part of the cross. 
 From our belly, we bring our hand up to our right shoulder, touching it. 
 We finish placing the cross on ourself by touching our left shoulder. 
 The act of "Placing the cross on oneself" is a request for a blessing from God. We make if from right to left to mirror the actions of the priest when he blesses us. The priest, looking at the parishioners, blesses from left to right. Therefore, the parishioners, putting on the sign of the cross on themselves, do it from right to left. 
 Because the Lord separated the sheep from the goats, putting the faithful sheep on His right side, and the goats on the left, the Church always treats the right side as the preferred side. We only cross ourselves with our RIGHT hand. The priest, when blessing a person, first touches or points to their RIGHT side, then their left. Also the censing of the Holy Table in the Altar is always done from the RIGHT side first; censing of the Ikonostasis, the Congregation and of the Church itself always begins with the right side. The priest always gives communion with his RIGHT hand, even if he is left handed. There are other examples of this right side preference. 
 When a parent makes the sign of the cross over a child, they will cross them from left to right, just as the priest blesses. When they make the sign of the cross over themselves, they would do it, logically, the other way. 
 The Catholic Encyclopedia states that in the Roman Catholic Church, the faithful crossed themselves from right to left, just as the Orthodox do, until the 15th or 16th century. They must explain why they have changed an ancient and apostolic tradition. We cannot answer as to their motivations. 
 Is it important to cross ourselves a particular way? In a word, YES. We do not have the authority to choose willy-nilly what parts of the Christina Tradition we want to follow. Our fathers, and countless saints crossed themselves from right to left. Ancient icons show Christ or bishops beginning a blessing from right to left. the right side is referred to in a preferential way many times in scripture and our sacred hymns What should we want to change? 
 Thanks for Fr Alexander Lebedev for providing the majority of the ideas in this answer. 
 We confidently recommend our web service provider, Orthodox Internet Services: excellent personal customer service, a fast and reliable server, excellent spam filtering, and an easy to use comprehensive control panel. 

 id="file23242575" filename="a-fighting-people-traditional-catholic-blessings-for-weapons" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://whispersofrestoration.blog/2020/11/01/a-fighting-people-traditional-catholic-blessings-for-weapons/">
 Timely Resources. Timeless Truth. Catholic Tradition. 
 A Fighting People: Traditional Catholic Blessings for Weapons 
 On this illustrious Feast, a celebration of our sainted warrior heritage is in order! [Scroll down to skip the commentary and go right to the blessing texts and citations.] 
 Qui non habet, vendat tunicam suam et emat gladium. “He that hath no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one.  (Lk 22:36) 
 Catholics Are a Fighting People 
 The Crusades, those glorious (and often misrepresented) medieval struggles for the honor of Christ and the safety of His people, come immediately to mind. These were days when the Church was led by clerics who summoned Catholics to take up weapons and defend the innocent, the sacred sites, and the honor of God and His Church. 
 Many have likewise heard of the Cristiada, when Mexican Catholics brought blades and bullets against the emerging Masonic government of the early 20th century, as it moved to control all public worship and reduce the Faith to private devotions and non-political exercise. (Sound familiar?) And why? 
 Because Catholics are a fighting people. 
 Sadly, the fighting spirit of Catholicism began to wane in the 20th century, with the rise of mechanized warfare and increasingly secular states. The Catholic cause for armed defense of a just social order, flowing from the rights of Christ and His Church, was increasingly contested by propagandists and even their own coreligionists – labeled “fanaticism,  “triumphalism,  and anything other than what it truly was: a reasoned response to divine legislation and its violation. 
 Yet even in those days, a Pope could be found lamenting that too few Catholics were zealous enough to take up arms for their Lord and His Church, to defend the Kingship of Christ in the earthly sphere: 
 This state of things may perhaps be attributed to a certain slowness and timidity in good people, who are reluctant to engage in conflict or oppose but a weak resistance; thus the enemies of the Church become bolder in their attacks. 
 But if the faithful were generally to understand that it behooves them ever to fight courageously under the banner of Christ their King, then, fired with apostolic zeal, they would strive to win over to their Lord those hearts that are bitter and estranged from him, and would valiantly defend his rights. 
 …While nations insult the beloved name of our Redeemer by suppressing all mention of it in their conferences and parliaments, we must all the more loudly proclaim his kingly dignity and power, all the more universally affirm his rights. (Pius XI, Quas Primas n. 24-25) 
 The rights of Christ our King are, after all, not an abstraction – and the obligation to recognize and defend those rights in the public sphere is neither “religious fanaticism  nor wishful thinking. In fact, to hold anything other than this truly militant ideal of the supremacy of Christ’s social reign is a very old error. 
 One can safely say that “squirtgun Catholicism,  in addition to being decidedly unmanly, is decidedly unCatholic as well. 
 Sadly, the clergy of the last one hundred years have been more or less trained as pietists: regarding the Kingship of Christ as an entirely spiritual kingdom, something interior and evanescent, something abstracted to the “cosmic and eschatological.  The general, unquestioning capitulation to Covid CancelChurch has proven this beyond any reasonable doubt. 
 Although many Catholics have become convinced that somehow it is more Christian to submit to unjust laws, it must be constantly reiterated that this notion (like so many modern errors) has been condemned centuries over by the pontiffs, and recently denounced as nothing but “stolid servility  by one prominent Archbishop. 
 For, alas, the conviction to fight in defense of a good is derived from the virtue of charity; and it must be clear to all that charity has indeed “waxed cold  in our days (cf. Mt 24:12). Who is now prepared to fight, out of love for Love Incarnate? 
 Because in truth, Catholics are a fighting people. 
 And they could be again. 
 Can Weapons Be Blessed? Should They? 
 Yes to both. There are several specific blessings for weapons in the Catholic tradition: swords, body armor, battle crosses, military banners… 
 …What, never heard of them? You can thank the 1960s’ liturgical revolution for that. 
 Because in fact, weapons have been blessed for centuries in the Roman Catholic tradition. They are, after all, tools of a morally neutral character. Therefore, weapons both can and ought to be put to virtuous use (particularly when that use involves the defense of life and the sacred), and blessings are conferred on them to precisely that end. 
 Some Catholic parishes still acknowledge this truth during hunting season, employing the catch-all “Blessing of All Things  from the traditional Rituale Romanum (which any priest can use, at any time) for a blessing of firearms and huntsmen. A laudable practice, indeed. We include the full text of that rite below. 
 (NOTE: We would love to find a well-designed booklet in Latin and English for some kind of “Blessing for Hunters & Arms,  drawing on the legacy of St. Hubert and the European hunting societies, including the Benedictio ad Omnia.) 
 From the 1962 editio typica of the Rituale Romanum (identical to that of 1952), usable per the provisions of Summorum Pontificum: 
 It bears mentioning that we treat of only pre-conciliar Catholic rites of blessing here because, as any experienced exorcist will tell you, the “blessings  contained in the post-Vatican II liturgical books are hardly worthy of the name. The sacramental theology at play after that Council was seriously deficient, and in the midst of the liturgical iconoclasm that ensued, its chief revisionist architect noted: “the area in which the most radical revision and new adaptation will be needed is the sacramentals. [1] They got the shaft. 
 And so, just as the ancient Roman Missale was gutted in the creation of a Protestantized construct to replace it, every ancient Rituale text was similarly changed (or deleted altogether) in the 1960s-70s, leading up to the debut of the dismally tepid Book of Blessings (1984), which has successfully reduced some of the most splendid and ancient Catholic rites of blessing to little more than Bible stories with reflections. As one priest put it: “The new Book of Blessings would be better entitled the Book of Pious Wishes.  Best avoid it altogether. 
 But those traditional blessings… now there’s the good stuff. Let’s take a look. 
 Of Bishops and Lost Blessings 
 Nowadays, many bishops are committed to disarming the Church militant, and will even preach on the virtue of subjugation to the state. But it was not always so! 
 Because the Church “prays as she believes  (lex orandi, lex credendi), few things can better illustrate the true fighting spirit of Catholicism than the Church’s ancient blessings for various battle implements. Below are some English translations (thanks to NLM’s Gregory DiPippo) of four different blessings in the old Pontificale Romanum, the liturgical book reserved to bishops and abbots that was first standardized by Pope Clement VIII in 1595, though its earliest manuscripts date from the 800s. 
 The images are taken from a Clementine Pontificale of 1595, along with the main texts of each blessing (sans versicles and complete rubrics). Links to full Latin texts are at bottom, so somebody should go publish an illuminated, Latin-English, hidebound tome of all these blessings for traditional Catholic warriors while they’re working on a booklet for hunters. 
 BLESSING OF ARMOR 
 Let us pray. May the blessing of Almighty God, the Fa+ther, the + Son and the Holy + Ghost, descend upon this armor, and upon him that weareth it, that he may defend justice. We ask Thee, Lord God, that Thou protect and defend him, that livest and reignest, one God for ever and ever. R. Amen. 
 Let us pray. Almighty God, in Whose hand rests full victory, and who gave marvelous strength to David that he might subdue the rebel Goliath, we ask for Thy clemency in this humble prayer, that of Thy great holiness Thou may deign to + bless this armor, and grant to Thy servant who desires to wear it, that he may use it freely and victoriously for the protection and defense of Holy Mother the Church, of orphans and widows, against the assaults of enemies visible and invisible. Through Christ, our Lord. R. Amen. 
 The armor is sprinkled with holy water. 
 BLESSING OF A SWORD 
 Let us pray. Deign Thou to + bless this sword, we ask Thee, Lord; and with the guard of Thy holiness defend this Thy servant, who at Thy inspiration desires to receive it, and keep him from every harm. Through Christ, our Lord. R. Amen. 
 The bishop sprinkles the sword with holy water, then hands it to the person who is to receive it as the latter kneels before him, saying: 
 Receive this sword, in the name of the Fa+ther, the + Son and the Holy + Ghost, and may thou use it for thy defense, and that of the Holy Church of God, and to the confounding of the enemies of the Cross of Christ, and of the Christian faith: and as far as human frailty shall permit, may thou harm no one with it unjustly. And may He deign to grant this to thee, Who with the Father and the Holy Ghost, etc. 
 BLESSING OF A MILITARY BANNER 
 Let us pray. Almighty and everlasting God, Who art the blessing of all, and the might of the triumphant, look in mercy upon our humble prayers, and sanctify this banner, that is prepared for the use of war, with a heavenly bless+ing; that it may be mighty against opposing and rebellious nations, and surrounded by Thy protection, and be terrible to the enemies of the Christian people, the strengthening of them that trust in Thee, and certain confidence of victory. For Thou art God, that puttest an end to wars (Judith 16, 3) and grantest the help of heavenly defense to them that hope in Thee. Through Thy only Son our Lord, etc. 
 The bishop sprinkles the banner with holy water, then hands it to the person who is to receive it as the latter kneels before him, saying: 
 Receive this banner, sanctified by a heavenly blessing, and may it be terrible to the enemies of the Christian people, and may the Lord give thee grace, that at His name, and to His honor, with it thou may pass in might both safe and sound through the bands of the enemies. 
 He then gives the man the kiss of peace, saying “Peace to thee ; he that has received it kisses the bishop’s hand and departs. 
 BLESSING AND IMPOSITION OF A CROSS 
 For those who go forth for the help and defense of the Christian Faith, or for the recovery of the Holy Land. 
 Almighty God, who didst dedicate the sign of the Cross by the precious blood of Thy Son, and who through the same Cross of Thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, didst will to redeem the world, and through the power of the same venerable Cross delivered the human race from the decree of the ancient enemy; we humbly beseech Thee, that Thou deign with Thy paternal goodness to bless + this cross and impart to it the power and grace of heaven; so that whoever shall bear it upon himself as the sign of the Passion and Cross of Thy Only-Begotten Son, for the protection of his body and soul, may also be able to receive the protection of Thy blessing. Just as Thou didst bless the rod of Aaron to drive away the faithlessness of the rebels, so also bless + Thou this sign with Thy right hand; and against all the wiles of the devil, lay upon it the power of Thy defense, that it may confer upon those who bear it prosperity of salvation in both soul and body, and multiply in them the gifts of the Spirit. 
 The bishop sprinkles the pectoral cross with holy water, and then says the following prayer over the one who will receive it. 
 Lord Jesus Christ, son of the living God, who art the true and almighty God, splendor and image of the Father, and life eternal; who proclaimed to Thy disciples, that whoever would come after Thee must deny himself, and taking up his cross, follow Thee; we ask Thy boundless clemency, that Thou protect always and everywhere this Thy servant, who according to Thy word, desireth to deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Thee, and for the salvation of Thy chosen people hasten to fight against our enemies; deliver him from all dangers, and release him from the bond of sin, receive his vow and bring it to the desired effect. Do Thou, o Lord, who art the way, the truth and the life, and the strength of them that hope in Thee, guide well his way, and grant him all success; so that amid the difficulties of this present age, he may be ever directed by Thy aid. Send to him, o Lord, Thy angel Raphael, who was the companion of Tobias on his journey, and delivered his father from bodily blindness; as he cometh and goeth, may he be his defender against all the snares of the enemy, visible and invisible, and drive from him all blindness of both mind and body. 
 He then sits, and lays the cross upon him, saying: 
 Receive the sign of the Cross, in the name of the Fa+ther and of the + Son, and of the Holy + Ghost, as a figure of the Cross, the Passion and the death of Christ, for the defense of thy body and soul, that by the grace of the divine goodness, thou may return to thine own safe and reformed when thy journey is completed. 
 Conclusion 
 Those prayers alone can put the “militant  in Church Militant. 
 Little wonder, then, that three of the four were entirely scrapped from the Pontificale by Pope John XXIII in 1961, with the fourth (the blessing of a cross) being edited and revamped for use as a bishop’s pectoral cross blessing. Notice that this was just before the opening of the Second Vatican Council, in anticipation of the more “ecumenical spirit  soon to prevail in the hierarchy. It must be considered the highest impiety and irreverence to simply throw out such beautiful and powerful rites – blessings that have been in use from the days of Charlemagne or even earlier – at the whim of one Pope who wished not to offend anyone! 
 Even so (as one liturgical scholar similarly suggests), given the 1,000+ year patrimony of these ancient and venerable rites, we maintain by normal Catholic principles that these Pontificale blessings can and ought to still be used, even ad hoc by individual bishops who are, after all, the chief liturgists and highest authority within their dioceses. We could certainly still benefit from them, and more of the same. (Might we dream of a future blessing for arma ignifera?) 
 In the meantime, the above benedictio ad omnia can be utilized for the firearms of the faithful, while plate carriers and fixed-blades could receive their own unique benedictions from the nearest bishop – and what an opportunity to evangelize! Banners and battle crosses should be brought back as well, as we certainly have need of “protection in body and soul  and being made “terrible to the enemies of the Christian people.  As the Saints of yesterday knew well: 
 “May we return from the Altar like lions breathing fire!  – St. John Chrysostom 
 Particularly for priests like Fr. Horan, who have too long forsaken their birthright of authentic and effective weapons in the service of Christ and traded them in for a mess of pious wishes and supersoakers, we pray that recalling these riches from our Catholic patrimony will strengthen all for the serious warfare of the Christian life, in the midst of a darkling pagan society. 
 Put away the squirtguns, Fathers. True Catholics are fighters! 
 Bravo the Restoration! 
 [1] Annibale Bugnini, The Reform of the Liturgy 1948–1975, trans. Matthew J. O’Connell (Collegeville MN: Liturgical Press, 1990), p. 580. It should also be observed that Archbishop Bugnini was a consummate liar, megalomaniac, despiser of Catholic tradition, and apparently a Freemason. This man invented the Novus Ordo – the form of the Mass that most Catholics have been praying for the last fifty years. Go figure. 
 RESOURCES & LINKS: 
 Scans of old Pontificales: 1595 here, 1776 here. The above blessings only (1595) here 
 Text of the last revision of the Pontificale (1895) before John XXIII’s evisceration here 
 A helpful piece on the social reign of Christ the King with encyclical links here 
 Translated bits from a 1600s’ guide to armed combat (Avisi Necessarii) here 

 id="file23242668" filename="ai-religion-robot-priest-mindar-buddhism-christianity" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.vox.com/future-perfect/2019/9/9/20851753/ai-religion-robot-priest-mindar-buddhism-christianity">
 Cookie banner 
 We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalized content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audiences come from. To learn more or opt-out, read our Cookie Policy. Please also read our Privacy Notice and Terms of Use, which became effective December 20, 2019. 
 By choosing I Accept, you consent to our use of cookies and other tracking technologies. 
 I Accept 
 Robot priests can bless you, advise you, and even perform your funeral 
 Share this story 
 Share All sharing options for: Robot priests can bless you, advise you, and even perform your funeral 
 A new priest named Mindar is holding forth at Kodaiji, a 400-year-old Buddhist temple in Kyoto, Japan. Like other clergy members, this priest can deliver sermons and move around to interface with worshippers. But Mindar comes with some ... unusual traits. A body made of aluminum and silicone, for starters. 
 Mindar is a robot. 
 Designed to look like Kannon, the Buddhist deity of mercy, the $1 million machine is an attempt to reignite people’s passion for their faith in a country where religious affiliation is on the decline. 
 For now, Mindar is not AI-powered. It just recites the same preprogrammed sermon about the Heart Sutra over and over. But the robot’s creators say they plan to give it machine-learning capabilities that’ll enable it to tailor feedback to worshippers’ specific spiritual and ethical problems. 
 “This robot will never die; it will just keep updating itself and evolving,  said Tensho Goto, the temple’s chief steward. “With AI, we hope it will grow in wisdom to help people overcome even the most difficult troubles. It’s changing Buddhism.  
 Robots are changing other religions, too. In 2017, Indians rolled out a robot that performs the Hindu aarti ritual, which involves moving a light round and round in front of a deity. That same year, in honor of the Protestant Reformation’s 500th anniversary, Germany’s Protestant Church created a robot called BlessU-2. It gave preprogrammed blessings to over 10,000 people. 
 Then there’s SanTO — short for Sanctified Theomorphic Operator — a 17-inch-tall robot reminiscent of figurines of Catholic saints. If you tell it you’re worried, it’ll respond by saying something like, “From the Gospel according to Matthew, do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. Each day has enough trouble of its own.  
 Roboticist Gabriele Trovato designed SanTO to offer spiritual succor to elderly people whose mobility and social contact may be limited. Next, he wants to develop devices for Muslims, though it remains to be seen what form those might take. 
 As more religious communities begin to incorporate robotics — in some cases, AI-powered and in others, not — it stands to change how people experience faith. It may also alter how we engage in ethical reasoning and decision-making, which is a big part of religion. 
 For the devout, there’s plenty of positive potential here: Robots can get disinterested people curious about religion or allow for a ritual to be performed when a human priest is inaccessible. But robots also pose risks for religion — for example, by making it feel too mechanized or homogenized or by challenging core tenets of theology. On the whole, will the emergence of AI religion make us better or worse off? The answer depends on how we design and deploy it — and on whom you ask. 
 Some cultures are more open to religious robots than others 
 New technologies often make us uncomfortable. Which ones we ultimately accept — and which ones we reject — is determined by an array of factors, ranging from our degree of exposure to the emerging technology to our moral presuppositions. 
 Japanese worshippers who visit Mindar are reportedly not too bothered by questions about the risks of siliconizing spirituality. That makes sense given that robots are already so commonplace in the country, including in the religious domain. 
 For years now, people who can’t afford to pay a human priest to perform a funeral have had the option to pay a robot named Pepper to do it at a much cheaper rate. And in China, at Beijing’s Longquan Monastery, an android monk named Xian’er recites Buddhist mantras and offers guidance on matters of faith. 
 What’s more, Buddhism’s non-dualistic metaphysical notion that everything has inherent “Buddha nature  — that all beings have the potential to become enlightened — may predispose its adherents to be receptive to spiritual guidance that comes from technology. 
 At the temple in Kyoto, Goto put it like this: “Buddhism isn’t a belief in a God; it’s pursuing Buddha’s path. It doesn’t matter whether it’s represented by a machine, a piece of scrap metal, or a tree.  
 “Mindar’s metal skeleton is exposed, and I think that’s an interesting choice — its creator, Hiroshi Ishiguro, is not trying to make something that looks totally human,  said Natasha Heller, an associate professor of Chinese religions at the University of Virginia. She told me the deity Kannon, upon whom Mindar is based, is an ideal candidate for cyborgization because the Lotus Sutra explicitly says Kannon can manifest in different forms — whatever forms will best resonate with the humans of a given time and place. 
 Westerners seem more disturbed by Mindar, likening it to Frankenstein’s monster. In Western economies, we don’t yet have robots enmeshed in many aspects of our lives. What we do have is a pervasive cultural narrative, reinforced by Hollywood blockbusters, about our impending enslavement at the hands of “robot overlords.  
 Plus, Abrahamic religions like Islam or Judaism tend to be more metaphysically dualistic — there’s the sacred and then there’s the profane. And they have more misgivings than Buddhism about visually depicting divinity, so they may take issue with Mindar-style iconography. 
 They also have different ideas about what makes a religious practice effective. For example, Judaism places a strong emphasis on intentionality, something machines don’t possess. When a worshipper prays, what matters is not just that their mouth forms the right words — it’s also very important that they have the right intention. 
 Meanwhile, some Buddhists use prayer wheels containing scrolls printed with sacred words and believe that spinning the wheel has its own spiritual efficacy, even if nobody recites the words aloud. In hospice settings, elderly Buddhists who don’t have people on hand to recite prayers on their behalf will use devices known as nianfo ji — small machines about the size of an iPhone, which recite the name of the Buddha endlessly. 
 Despite such theological differences, it’s ironic that many Westerners have a knee-jerk negative reaction to a robot like Mindar. The dream of creating artificial life goes all the way back to ancient Greece, where the ancients actually invented real animated machines as the Stanford classicist Adrienne Mayor has documented in her book Gods and Robots. And there is a long tradition of religious robots in the West. 
 In the Middle Ages, Christians designed automata to perform the mysteries of Easter and Christmas. One proto-roboticist in the 16th century designed a mechanical monk that is, amazingly, performing ritual gestures to this day. With his right arm, he strikes his chest in a mea culpa; with his left, he raises a rosary to his lips. 
 In other words, the real novelty is not the use of robots in the religious domain but the use of AI. 
 How AI may change our theology and ethics 
 Even as our theology shapes the AI we create and embrace, AI will also shape our theology. It’s a two-way street. 
 Some people believe AI will force a truly momentous change in theology, because if humans create intelligent machines with free will, we’ll eventually have to ask whether they have something functionally similar to a soul. 
 “There will be a point in the future when these free-willed beings that we’ve made will say to us, ‘I believe in God. What do I do?’ At that point, we should have a response,  said Kevin Kelly, a Christian co-founder of Wired magazine who argues we need to develop “a catechism for robots.  
 Other people believe that, rather than seeking to join a human religion, AI itself will become an object of worship. Anthony Levandowski, the Silicon Valley engineer who triggered a major Uber/Waymo lawsuit, has set up the first church of artificial intelligence, called Way of the Future. Levandowski’s new religion is dedicated to “the realization, acceptance, and worship of a Godhead based on artificial intelligence (AI) developed through computer hardware and software.  
 Meanwhile, Ilia Delio, a Franciscan sister who holds two PhDs and a chair in theology at Villanova University, told me AI may also force a traditional religion like Catholicism to reimagine its understanding of human priests as divinely called and consecrated — a status that grants them special authority. 
 “The Catholic notion would say the priest is ontologically changed upon ordination. Is that really true?  she asked. Maybe priestliness is not an esoteric essence but a programmable trait that even a “fallen  creation like a robot can embody. “We have these fixed philosophical ideas and AI challenges those ideas — it challenges Catholicism to move toward a post-human priesthood.  (For now, she joked, a robot would probably do better as a Protestant.) 
 Then there are questions about how robotics will change our religious experiences. Traditionally, those experiences are valuable in part because they leave room for the spontaneous and surprising, the emotional and even the mystical. That could be lost if we mechanize them. 
 To visualize an automated ritual, take a look at this video of a robotic arm performing a Hindu aarti ceremony: 
 Another risk has to do with how an AI priest would handle ethical queries and decision-making. Robots whose algorithms learn from previous data may nudge us toward decisions based on what people have done in the past, incrementally homogenizing answers to our queries and narrowing the scope of our spiritual imagination. 
 That risk also exists with human clergy, Heller pointed out: “The clergy is bounded too — there’s already a built-in nudging or limiting factor, even without AI.  
 But AI systems can be particularly problematic in that they often function as black boxes. We typically don’t know what sorts of biases are coded into them or what sorts of human nuance and context they’re failing to understand. 
 Let’s say you tell a robot you’re feeling depressed because you’re unemployed and broke, and the only job that’s available to you seems morally odious. Maybe the robot responds by reciting a verse from Proverbs 14: “In all toil there is profit, but mere talk tends only to poverty.  Even if it doesn’t presume to interpret the verse for you, in choosing that verse it’s already doing hidden interpretational work. It’s analyzing your situation and algorithmically determining a recommendation — in this case, one that may prompt you to take the job. 
 But perhaps it would’ve worked out better for you if the robot had recited a verse from Proverbs 16: “Commit your work to the Lord, and your plans will be established.  Maybe that verse would prompt you to pass on the morally dubious job, and, being a sensitive soul, you’ll later be happy you did. Or maybe your depression is severe enough that the job issue is somewhat beside the point and the crucial thing is for you to seek out mental health treatment. 
 A human priest who knows your broader context as a whole person may gather this and give you the right recommendation. An android priest might miss the nuances and just respond to the localized problem as you’ve expressed it. 
 The fact is human clergy members do so much more than provide answers. They serve as the anchor for a community, bringing people together. They offer pastoral care. And they provide human contact, which is in danger of becoming a luxury good as we create robots to more cheaply do the work of people. 
 On the other hand, Delio said, robots can excel in a social role in some ways that human priests might not. “Take the Catholic Church. It’s very male, very patriarchal, and we have this whole sexual abuse crisis. So would I want a robot priest? Maybe!  she said. “A robot can be gender-neutral. It might be able to transcend some of those divides and be able to enhance community in a way that’s more liberating.  
 Ultimately, in religion as in other domains, robots and humans are perhaps best understood not as competitors but as collaborators. Each offers something the other lacks. 
 As Delio put it, “We tend to think in an either/or framework: It’s either us or the robots. But this is about partnership, not replacement. It can be a symbiotic relationship — if we approach it that way.  
 For more on robot priests — including a conversation with a Catholic robot — listen to this episode of the Reset podcast, guest-hosted by Sigal Samuel: 
 Reporting for this article was supported by Public Theologies of Technology and Presence, a journalism and research initiative based at the Institute of Buddhist Studies and funded by the Henry Luce Foundation. 
 Sign up for the Future Perfect newsletter. Twice a week, you’ll get a roundup of ideas and solutions for tackling our biggest challenges: improving public health, decreasing human and animal suffering, easing catastrophic risks, and — to put it simply — getting better at doing good. 
 Future Perfect is funded in part by individual contributions, grants, and sponsorships. Learn more here. 
 Millions turn to Vox to understand what’s happening in the news. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower through understanding. Financial contributions from our readers are a critical part of supporting our resource-intensive work and help us keep our journalism free for all. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today to help us keep our work free for all. 
 How to sponsor an Afghan refugee family 
 Nearly half the world’s kids are exposed to dangerous levels of lead 
 Is Covax finally going to vaccinate the world? 
 Sign up for the newsletter Sign up for Meat/Less 
 How to eat well and do good, in 5 emails. 
 Thanks for signing up! 
 Check your inbox for a welcome email. 
 Email (required) 
 By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Notice and European users agree to the data transfer policy. For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page. 

 id="file23242798" filename="alcohol-and-religion" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.alimentarium.org/en/knowledge/alcohol-and-religion">
 Welcome ! 
 Think. Learn. Interact. 
 Log in 
 Alcohol and religion 
 Alcoholic drinks are highly symbolic in many religions. Islam and Buddhism reject alcohol for its psychotropic properties. However, it features in rituals in other religions. The Fali people use beer in all their ceremonies, while wine plays a sacred role in Judaism. 
 The two sides of alcohol 
 Alcoholic drinks feature in many religions. Whether beer, wine, pulque (made from agave sap) in Central America, chicha (made from corn) in the Andes, or rice-based spirits in the Far East, all these fermented drinks are highly symbolic. The complex fermentation process requires skill and, if the result is sometimes unpredictable, this has been attributed to divine intervention. Wine very soon replaced the sacrificial offering of animal blood to the gods and was a way for people to commune with deities. The Catholic Church gave wine a sacred dimension, recalling the blood of Jesus Christ. 
 Alcohol can also be a symbol of excess and confusion. Consuming alcohol has psychotropic effects that can be pleasantly liberating or cause debauchery and social disorder. Some of the world’s religions have made a distinction between temperance, inebriation and drunkenness. They disapprove of disorderly consumption of alcohol and only tolerate a certain level of intoxication in a clearly defined context. Buddhism and Islam condemn alcohol because it induces a loss of self-control. In the Sunni tradition, “alcohol is the mother of all vices and it is the most shameful vice  (Sounan Ibn-Majah, Hadith 3371). However, wine remains the promised drink in heaven. 
 Ceremonial use of alcohol 
 Alcohol played an important role in ancient rituals. It was offered as a libation and would accompany the deceased on their final journey, or play a role in rites of passage, the cycles of life or the seasons, for example. It could also induce mystical intoxication. The link between religion and alcohol remains present to this day, as in some animist and polytheist religions. Among the Fali people in Cameroon, millet beer (known as bolo) is a festive drink that features in every ritual. They use it to warm up the body during initiation ceremonies. It can be an offering and help people make contact with their ancestors and with supernatural powers. The Shamanic ritual uses other psychotropic beverages to access the afterlife and make contact with the spirits, as is the case with ayahuasca (a drink made from vines) in the Amazon rainforest. 
 Wine is a central part of Judeo-Christian religions. In Judaism, wine is sanctified and consumed as part of rituals. Festive and Sabbath meals always begin with the ‘kiddush’, the blessing of the wine before blessing the bread. The participants then pass the wine cup around. During the Passover Seder meal, one of the most widely observed feasts in Judaism, adults and children drink from four cups of wine at specific times. This custom serves, among other things, as a means of expressing the joy of freedom regained, of rejoicing and praising God’s generosity. Wine also takes pride of place during the feasts of Purim, which commemorate the salvation of the Jewish people in the ancient Persian Empire, and Simhat Torah, which celebrates the receipt of the Torah. At Purim, guests are even encouraged to become slightly inebriated as this is seen as an expression of joy. However, aside from these more permissive festivals, in general, drinking alcohol, even in moderation, remains heavily codified. Christianity permits the consumption of alcohol during convivial moments of sharing, but condemns drunkenness as part of the sin of gluttony, given that it merely serves to provide selfish, carnal pleasure. 
 Bahloul, Joëlle, 1983. Le culte de la Table Dressée. Paris : Éditions A.-M. Métailié. 
 Bologne, Jean-Claude, 1991. Histoire culturelle et morale de nos boissons. Paris : Éditions Robert Laffont. 
 Fournier, Dominique, D’Onofrio, Salvatore (dir.), 1989. Le ferment divin. Paris : Éditions de la Maison des sciences de l’homme. 
 Gauthier, Jean-Gabriel, 1999. Chez les Fali du Cameroun : dora an djo bolo, viens boire de la bière. In Ferments en folie. Vevey : Fondation Alimentarium. 

 id="file23242684" filename="all-access-pass-spring-2022" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://theinstituteofcatholictheology.thinkific.com/bundles/all-access-pass-spring-2022">
 All Access Pass - Spring 2022 
 Vatican II Revisited - Part II 
 Join us for our Spring 2022 semester entitled Vatican II Revisited - Part II, in we will examine the main teachings and documents of the Second Vatican II and their impact on the Church. The theme will be run through our Saturday Morning Lectures Series and in the March Spiritual Life Conference. 
 All classes will be streamed live online and recorded for our course library...as they always have been, since 2009! 
 The All-Access Pass includes all Spring events, including: 
 Tuesdays, February 1, 8, 15. 6:00pm-8:00pm. Seminars in Catholic Theology. The Constitutions of Vatican II: Sacrosanctum Concilium. - Fr. Fernando Camou 
 Saturday, February 5, 9:15am-10:15am. First Saturdays with the Saints. Blessed Bartolo Longo - Jen Arnold 
 Saturday, February 12, 9:15am-11:00am. Saturday Morning Lectures Series. Vatican II Decrees and Declarations: Eastern Rite Churches, Catholic Education, Bishops - Nicole Delaney - Sr. Johanna Paruch, FSGM, PhD 
 Tuesdays, March 1, 8, 15. 6:00pm-8:00pm. Seminars in Catholic Theology. The Constitutions of Vatican II: Lumen Gentium. - Fr. John Muir 
 Saturday, March 5, 9:15am-10:15am. First Saturdays with the Saints. Venerable Mary of Ágreda. - Fr. John Nahrgang 
 Saturday, March 19, 8:30am-12:30pm. Spiritual Life Conference V. The Liturgy: The Source of Christian Life and Mission. - Dcn. Dr. Bob Rice 
 Saturday, April 2, 9:15am-10:15am. First Saturdays with the Saints. St. André Bessette. - Ryan Ayala 
 Saturday, April 9, 9:15am-11:00am. Saturday Morning Lectures Series. Vatican II Decrees and Declarations: Religious Life, Laity, Ecumenism. - Sr. Maria Rose Metzger, OP - Laura Gallant - Fr. David Loeffler 
 The Institute Classroom is located to the west of the church, in the parish office building, south of the gift shop, towards Campbell Ave. 
 Phone: 602-954-9089 
 Bundle includes 
 Here are all the courses that are included in your bundle. 

 id="file23242839" filename="americans-who-reject-the-religious-rights-theology-are-not-confused" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.au.org/blogs/wall-of-separation/americans-who-reject-the-religious-rights-theology-are-not-confused">
 Americans Who Reject The Religious Right’s Theology Are Not ‘Confused’ 
 The American Family Association (AFA), a Religious Right outfit based in Tupelo, Miss., is befuddled by a “head-scratching  new survey of Americans’ religious beliefs issued by Ligonier Ministries and LifeWay Research. It seems that many Americans accept some core Christian doctrines, but after that they’re “all over the theological map.  
 Results like this could only be a surprise to the Religious Right. The rest of us have long understood that America’s tradition of religious freedom has spawned incredible religious diversity. 
 Surveys like this come out from time to time, and the usual reaction of Religious Right groups is to opine that people are “confused  because they don’t accept a fundamentalist interpretation of Christianity. Indeed, Ligonier Ministries’ summary uses that very term: “The 2018 State of Theology survey reveals deep confusion about the Bible’s teaching, not only among Americans as a whole, but also among evangelicals. There is something very wrong when a majority of Americans can give the correct answers to basic Bible questions and at the same time say that their beliefs are purely a matter of personal opinion.  
 But what if these individuals are not “confused  at all? What if they are simply doing what people in this country where religious freedom is protected by separation of church and state have always done: forging their own spiritual path? 
 One of the more interesting trends in American life these days is the rise of “do-it-yourself  spirituality. More and more Americans are drifting away from established houses of worship, but that doesn’t mean they’re giving up on faith. Many of the “nones  (people who, when asked to name their religion, answer “none ) are still spiritual – they’re just crafting their own theological brew. 
 While the trend is growing – even among self-identified evangelicals, apparently – it’s nothing new. Roger Williams, the colonial-era religious liberty advocate and founder of Rhode Island, was a seeker all of his life. Williams was a Puritan minister who briefly became a Baptist but ended up doing his own thing because, he concluded, no one could know for certain how God wanted people to worship. 
 Or consider Thomas Jefferson, who, when asked to state his religious preference, famously replied, “I am of a sect by myself as far as I know.  
 This sort of thing bothers the AFA, which asserts, “But when it comes to some of the more difficult truths of the gospel, Americans in general and even evangelicals are slipping. Half of evangelicals, for example, believe God accepts the worship of all religions.  
 The problem here is that one Christian’s “truths  are another’s rank heresy. One person’s revealed religion is another’s pack of falsehoods. Some people really do believe there is only “one true faith  – and over the centuries they’ve coalesced around hundreds, if not thousands, of versions. 
 Many of the fundamentalist followers of the AFA likely believe in a God who demands an exacting form of worship and adherence to a narrow set of ultra-right-wing political beliefs as well, (Indeed, the Ligonier Ministries survey bemoans the fact that millennials are generally accepting of LGBTQ rights.) Theirs is a god of division, of hate, of prejudice. Their god conveniently endorses every far-right political opinion they hold. Millions of Americans – Christians, other believers and nonbelievers alike – aren’t interested in worshipping this god, and thanks to our nation’s legacy of religious freedom, they don’t have to. 
 People have been arguing about theology for a long time. Many have been killed or oppressed in the process. The United States helped put a stop to all of that with a policy that says when it comes to religion, feel free to make your best argument for whatever team you’re on, but don’t expect the government to back your side – or any side, for that matter. 
 Thanks to the principle of religious freedom protected by a church-state wall, we have the right to experiment. We can borrow from several faith traditions, merging and blending. We can accept some of what a faith offers but turn away other aspects. We can launch new religions – or we can reject them all. 
 And, most importantly, we can keep on seeking. We can change our minds. We can adopt new views over time, as Roger Williams did, aware that what he called “soul liberty,  freedom of conscience, is inviolable and absolute. 
 Today, more and more Americans are emulating Williams and rejecting the narrow, stifling and divisive theology of the Religious Right. I don’t believe these people are “confused.  In fact, I think they know exactly what they’re doing. 

 id="file23242556" filename="an-epiphany-blessing" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://artandtheology.org/2022/01/06/an-epiphany-blessing/">
 An Epiphany Blessing 
 Arise, shine; for your light has come, and the glory of the LORD has risen upon you. For darkness shall cover the earth, and thick darkness the peoples; but the LORD will arise upon you, and his glory will appear over you. 
 —Isaiah 60:1–2 
 LOOK: Comet by Antonello Silverini 
 LISTEN: “May It Be  | Words by Roma Ryan, 2001 | Music by Enya, 2001 | Performed by Voces8, 2018 
 May it be an evening star Shines down upon you May it be when darkness falls Your heart will be true You walk a lonely road Oh, how far you are from home 
 Mornië utúlië Believe and you will find your way Mornië alantië A promise lives within you now 
 May it be the shadow’s call Will fly away May it be you journey on To light the day When the night is overcome You may rise to find the sun 
 Mornië utúlië Believe and you will find your way Mornië alantië A promise lives within you now A promise lives within you now 
 At the behest of composer Howard Shore, film director Peter Jackson approached Enya to write a song for his 2001 epic fantasy adventure The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring, the first in a trilogy. Enya brought her lyricist Roma Ryan on board, and together they wrote “May It Be.  The song, which plays during the movie’s end credits, contains two lines in the fictional Elvish language Quenya that J. R. R. Tolkien invented: “Mornië utúlië  and “Mornië alantië,  which translate to “Darkness has come  and “Darkness has fallen.  
 Why am I sharing this “secular  song (inspired by a tale of hobbits, elves, and wizards) on today’s feast of Epiphany, the grand finale of the Christmas season? I could have chosen one of the church’s many beautiful works of music written explicitly for this day (and I have in previous years, such as here, here, and here, not to mention yesterday’s festive feature)—perhaps something louder, brighter, more triumphant—but instead I wanted to cap off the Twelve Days of Christmas with a benediction. It’s from an unlikely source, sure, but it speaks well, I think, to where we’re at in the liturgical year. 
 According to Christianity, darkness entered the world with humanity’s rebellion against their Creator in the garden of Eden. Sin and death became a reality that, millennia later, we still grapple with. But a promise was spoken in the beginning, was born in a manger at Christmas, walked the dusty streets of Israel-Palestine teaching the Way and performing wonders, was nailed to a cross and buried but then rose from the grave and now lives in the hearts of millions. Jesus Christ is the embodiment of God’s promise of salvation and holistic restoration—shalom, the world set right again. 
 The light of Christ shone on the small Jewish town of Bethlehem at the Nativity and on the wider Gentile world at Epiphany (when the magi traveled from afar to receive personal revelation, an experience they brought back with them to their homelands), and it continues to shine, often in unexpected places. 
 Advent is a journey through the dark into the light that breaks at Christmas/Epiphany. Although in one sense morning has broken, in another sense this earth is still very much in darkness. Even the “children of light  (1 Thess. 5:5), those who have been reborn in Christ, experience (and sometimes, sadly, inflict) ache and horror as much as anyone else. 
 But hope has come. The Word has been spoken, redemption won, even if it’s not yet been consummated. We walk in the valley of shadows, but eventually the night will be vanquished, as Enya’s song says, and we will rise and greet the sun—or, to put a Christian inflection on it, the Son! 
 May we walk forward into 2022 true to our calling as sons and daughters of God. May we welcome God’s light and bear it to others, and trust the Promise that indwells us. 
 This is the final post in the 2021–22 Advent/Christmas series. Thanks for following! You can find a collation here (Advent) and here (Christmas). I will now return to my regular publication schedule of roughly one post a week. 
 Share this: 
 Like this: 
 Like Loading... 
 12 thoughts on “An Epiphany Blessing  
 Thank you so much for putting this Advent/Christmas series together. It was edifying and beautiful. 
 This is just lovely, as indeed the whole series has been. Thank you for the hard and brilliant work! 
 I really enjoy your posts, but especially the special series. What a fantastic way to end it up! Your hard, thoughtful work is truly appreciated! Happy New Year . . . Happy Epiphany!! 
 I learned of your posts from my late friend, Leeba Lessin, who has been gone now nearly a year. She would have loved this last one too. Thanks for sharing your gifts by providing such quality, encouraging, light in the darkness content. May His blessings abound. Tamara 
 Greetings Victoria Emily Jones! I’m a Mennonite pastor of a small (70-100) somewhat multiracial, multicultural congregation in Elkhart, Indiana. Your Advent and Christmas series has been what has fed me daily apart from worship and sermon preparation during this season. Your reflections along with art and music has fed my soul. I also enjoy your regular blogging and resources. Thank-you! 
 Thank you Victoria, it’s been a wonderful daily ride through the seasons and the arts. Thanks for ending with Voces 8, my absolute favorite a cappella group as well. Blessings! 
 Thank you so much for these reflections during Advent and Christmas. They are *excellent* and have provided me with much hope in my daily walk on God’s good earth. 
 Thanks for sharing written, visual and sung words of hope for the new year! I also love this quote from Tolkien’s Return of the King, that I am using in a sermon this Sunday: “There, peeping among the cloud-wrack above a dark tor high up in the mountains, Sam saw a white star twinkle for a while. The beauty of it smote his heart, as he looked up out of the forsaken land, and hope returned to him. For like a shaft, clear and cold, the thought pierced him that in the end the Shadow was only a small and passing thing: there was light and high beauty for ever beyond its reach.  For my illuminated artwork see artoffaith.substack.com and FestalDesign.com. Thanks and God bless! 
 Thank you for this Advent treat. I was introduced to musical groups I have never heard of and art that was fresh and thoughtful. I looked forward to it every day. 

 id="file23242622" filename="archbishop-peter-machado-blesses-udupi-pastoral-centre-anugraha" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.mangalorean.com/archbishop-peter-machado-blesses-udupi-pastoral-centre-anugraha/">
 Archbishop Peter Machado Blesses Udupi Pastoral Centre ‘Anugraha’ 
 Archbishop Peter Machado Blesses Udupi Pastoral Centre ‘Anugraha’ 
 Udupi: The inauguration and blessing of one of the prestigious projects of the Udupi Diocese, the Pastoral Centre ‘Anugraha’ was held on 13 January 2022 at Kukkunje. 
 Spiritual Director of Educare and former Episcopal Vicar of Udupi Dr Valerian D’Souza inaugurated the Pastoral Centre and Archbishop of Bangalore, Dr Peter Machado conducted the blessing of the centre. 
 Speaking on this occasion, MLA of Udupi Raghupati Bhat said that he considered himself fortunate that while the new Diocese of Udupi was formed ten years ago as well as when the new Pastoral Centre is being inaugurated he was the MLA on both occasions and could take part in both of these programmes. He further said that the Christian community has been at the forefront in both Udupi and Mangalore Districts in the field of education and healthcare. The Pastoral Centre was a long pending dream of the Udupi Diocese and through this centre, the Christian community will render greater service in the District. 
 Bishop of Udupi, Dr Gerald Isaac Lobo felicitated Raghupati Bhat for his full support and cooperation in the construction of the Pastoral Centre and for helping in getting the necessary clearances from the government institutions in this matter. 
 Following the inauguration and blessing of the Pastoral Centre, Archbishop Peter Machado presided over the stage programme. 
 Former Archbishop of Bhopal Dr Leo Cornelio in his message said that the Pastoral Centre ‘Anugraha’ is a divine gift to the people of Santekatte, Kallianpur. It is a matter of pride that Kukkunje Ward will be known worldwide as the place where the beautiful Pastoral Centre of the Udupi Diocese is located. The Udupi Diocese has been doing excellent progress for the last ten years. He hoped that due to the selfless contribution of the Bishop, priests, religious men and women as well as the people, the diocese would be able to achieve greater success and progress in the coming years. 
 Speaking on this occasion, former MLA of Kaup Constituency and former minister, Vinay Kumar Sorake said that the longstanding dream of the Bishop of the Udupi Diocese has been realized with the inauguration and blessing of the Pastoral Centre. The service of the Christian community in the field of education is praiseworthy, the organization has greatly impacted the lives of millions of young people, forming them, to be honest citizens of the country. 
 Besides the educational institutions, they have been serving society through their service-based healthcare system. These are the service-oriented living examples of the Christian community. No one can ignore the twenty percent contribution to the nation by the two per cent Christian population. 
 In his address, Bishop Gerald Isaac Lobo said that the newly inaugurated and blessed ‘Anugraha’ Pastoral Centre would be a centre of all-around activities of the Udupi Diocese. He further said that in spite of various ups and downs during the last four years of its construction, the dream project of the Udupi Diocese is being realized and he thanked all those who made it possible. 
 In his presidential message, Archbishop Peter Machado said that he felt extremely happy to be a part of the inauguration and blessing of the Pastoral Centre. He further said that out of 14 dioceses in the state, Udupi Diocese has emerged as a model diocese not only in Karnataka but in the entire country due to its excellent service to the community and society at large. He appreciated the contribution of Bishop Gerald Isaac Lobo to the overall progress of the diocese during the last ten years. Archbishop Peter Machado, continuing said that through his foresight and deep thinking, Bishop Gerald Isaac Lobo was instrumental in erecting such a beautiful Pastoral Centre. His contribution to spiritual as well as social progress in the diocese has been an example for others to follow. 
 On this occasion, the donor of the land to build the Pastoral Centre, financial donors, architects, engineers and contractors were appropriately honoured. Fr Denis D’Sa, Fr Anil Prakash D’Silva and Fr Steven D’Souza introduced the receivers of the felicitation. On behalf of the diocese Bishop Gerald Isaac Lobo was felicitated by Leslie Aroza, Secretary of the Diocesan Pastoral Committee and former secretary Alphonse D’Costa. 
 Jerry Vincent Dias- a prominent businessman, Balkrishna Shetty-the Municipal member of Kukkunje ward and president of the Standing Committee, Fr Valerian Mendonca-Rector of the Milagres Cathedral and Rev. Dr Leslie D’Souza-Parish priest of Mount Rosary Church, Santekatte were present. 
 Fr Romeo Lewis, Estate Manager of the Udupi Diocese briefed on the background of the construction of the Pastoral Centre. Fr Stany Lobo-Chancellor of the Udupi Diocese welcomed the gathering, Fr Royson Fernandes-Editor of the diocesan fortnightly ‘Uzwaad’ delivered the vote of thanks. Leslie Aroza-the secretary of the Diocesan Pastoral Committee compered the programme. 

 id="file23242566" filename="a-theological-account-of-blessing" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.australianchurchrecord.net/a-theological-account-of-blessing/">
 Australian Church Record 
 A Theological Account of Blessing 
 At the recent Synod of the Diocese of Wangarratta (Aug 2019) Dr Dorothy Lee mounted a case for the possibility of Australian Anglican churches blessing same-sex unions in keeping with the general practice of blessing civil unions and the local practices of blessing various aspects of daily life. This paper addresses the biblical and theological premises of Dr Lee’s address and argues: 
 A. The scriptural account of blessing by God is synonymous with the revelation of God’s will for the world through Jesus Christ. 
 B. The scriptural account of blessing by God includes the reality of God’s curse (or wrath) being prosecuted against creaturely life that does not conform to his will in Christ. 
 C. In the interim between promise and fulfilment, the biblical writers acknowledge a tension between the apparent flourishing of those under curse and the promise of blessing for those who uphold God’s covenant. 
 D. It is not possible for an Anglican Church in Australia to uphold the theological nature of blessing and give consent to, affirm, or in any other way condone, same-sex unions. 
 Blessing and the will of God – Lee points to the Genesis account claiming that, “To be blessed by God means to receive God’s favour in protection of us and provision for us.  In the context of Genesis, this definition is insufficiently exact. In the creation account, to be blessed by God is to be declared fit for purpose and enabled to fulfil that purpose according to divine will.[1] So, as we examine the Creation account in Genesis1 and 2 the Lord blesses the living things (1:22), especially the man and woman (1:28), declaring them fit for the purpose of filling the earth. The man and the woman joined together are declared, by God, to be very good and God’s will for them in the world is made plain. Later, when the man Noah and his family emerge from the Ark, God’s will for humankind is revealed as they are blessed and recommissioned with the creation mandate of Genesis 1:26-28 (cf.Gen 9:1) 
 When God calls Abram, he receives promises of blessing and the covenant that is subsequently established by God with him is the inner meaning of those blessings. God reveals both his will for Abram and his will for ‘the nations’ when he promises to bless Abram and make him a blessing to all nations (Gen 12:1-4; 22:18). When this office of mediator is recognised by the King of Salem (Gen 14:19), the writer describes the act of recognition as a blessing even as Abraham’s status in God’s intentions is confirmed. Thus, the act of blessing is tightly bound to a revelation of God’s will for a person or group.[2] 
 As Lee acknowledges, “The covenant made with the people of Israel on Mount Sinai brings with it the promise of blessing in response to obedience to the Law of Moses.  Yet, Israel is redeemed from slavery on the basis of the Abrahamic covenant (Exod 3:14-15) and, within the covenant relationship, is God’s ‘special possession’ for mediating his will to and for the world as a ‘holy nation’ and a ‘kingdom of priests’ (Exod 19:5-6). As they participated in the cultic, moral and judicial elements of the covenant they were blessed by the designated mediators of God’s will – Moses and Aaron (Lev 9:22-23). Fidelity on the part of the people to God’s promises would result in blessings to every aspect of Israelite life as confirmation that their lives were in accordance with his will (Deut 28:3-6). 
 When, by the power of the Spirit, the eternal Son becomes a creature in his own creation, he enters the line of David and assumes a place as an inheritor of the promises to Abraham (Matt 1:2-15). Without the explicit language of blessing he is publicly recognised as the ‘beloved son’ of God who perfectly conformed to his Father’s will and hence ‘with whom [the Father] is well pleased’ (Luke 3:22). Subsequently however, both those who see and believe this declaration are blessed (Matt 16:17; Mark 8:28) by God through him as are even those who do not see and yet believe (John 20:29), for this is God’s will for people to be saved from their sins (Matt 1:21). Furthermore, the Christ pronounces blessings on any who see in him the purposes of God’s coming kingdom and turn aside from the religious aspirations of the world – including the Pharisaic piety of the day (Matt 5:3-10). They are blessed as they acclaim and proclaim the will of God for humanity in the Christ. 
 Blessing and cursing in the will of God – A significant aspect of blessing as a revelation or recognition of divine will in the biblical narrative is its asymmetric complement, divine curse or wrath.[3] From the Genesis account of blessing, the rebellion of the man and the woman against God is examined, judged and prosecuted as actions that are not according to God’s will for them. God acts in wrath towards sin, death and evil in creation generated entirely from his holy love for creation and this action is described in the subsequent narrative as curse. So, the man and the woman are restored by God to each other; humanity is restored to a right order with the creatures and humanity is restored to its relationship with the creation according to God’s will. However, and because of their sin, they all experience this as divine curse (Gen 3:14-17).[4] 
 When God chooses Noah to preserve his intentions for humanity in the face of near universal creaturely rebellion, the subsequent blessing he and his family receive must be viewed in the context of God’s curse in the form of the flood (Gen 6).[5] Later, and more explicitly, when God calls Abram in Genesis 12 and promises the blessings of name, progeny and land, he announces Abram as an agent of both blessing and curse: “I will bless those who bless you, and him who dishonors you I will curse, and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed  (Gen 12:3 ESV). The covenant that ensues between God and Abraham delineates human life before God as either blessed or cursed according to conformity with divine will as revealed through God’s gracious choice to bless. 
 As Israel stands on the plains of Moab in anticipation of entering the promised land of blessing, they are reminded by Moses that infidelity towards the covenant will bring curse: “See, I am setting before you today a blessing and a curse:  (Deut 11:26). The life that is blessed by the Lord and therefore acclaimed as according with his will is one in contrast to the life that is cursed by God. To break any part of the Law was to break all of it (Deut 27:26). The tragic fate of the Israelite story is, of course, that subsequent generations of infidelity finally exhausted the Lord’s patience, the curses of Deuteronomy 27 were fulfilled, and Israel was sent into exile. Faithfulness to God’s Law brought blessing and life. Infidelity to God’s will brought curse and death. 
 With the coming of the Christ in fulfilment of God’s intentions to save, “Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us  (Gal 3:13 ESV). The will of God revealed in the blessing of Abraham is fulfilled in the risen Jesus the Christ and comes through him in the Spirit (Gal 3:14). In fact, ‘every spiritual blessing in the heavenly realm’ is graciously made available to those in Christ (Eph 1:3), those sealed with the Spirit (Eph 1:13). In the New Covenant, the mindset of the Spirit brings life while the desires of the flesh bring death (Rom 8:13). In fact, our bodies are ‘a Temple of the Holy Spirit,’ such that we ‘honour God with our bodies’ (1 Cor 6:17). Thus, those in Christ, and by the power of the Spirit, renounce their former embodied activities as under the curse or the wrath of God (1 Cor 6:9-11, cf. Rom 1:18-31). 
 Flourishing and the curse of God – In the first instance, when God blesses a person, or a person recognises and declares another as blessed by God, it is a moment of revelation. A particular creaturely existence is declared to be in accordance with the will of God and his intentions for created life – especially human life. The alternative in the greater Scriptural narrative is the curse of God towards creaturely life that defies or is otherwise recalcitrant towards divine intention. In fact, the former is invariably revealed to be present in the context of, and in contrast to, the latter. Hence, the revelation that a certain individual or group is blessed also invariably requires divine intervention in the form of illumination. Otherwise the circumstances of flourishing may well be mistaken for creaturely life that accords with divine intention. 
 In Genesis 4 the descendants of Cain are recorded as patriarchs of human culture and flourishing akin to the creation mandate (Gen 1:28), ‘building cities,’ (4:17) ‘the father of nomadic herdsmen,’ (4:20) ‘the father of all who play lyre and flute,’ (4:21) ‘maker of all kinds of bronze and iron tools’ (4:22). From a superficial perspective these individuals and their families appeared blessed until we recall God’s curse on Cain (4:11). Conversely, though blessed by God with various promises of progeny and place, Abraham and Sarah and their descendants wander through the land enduring periods of barrenness, and therefore apparent curse, as they await the fulfilment of God’s covenantal intentions (Gen 15:2, 25:21, 29:31). 
 As the story of Israel in the land progresses, the question of YHWH’s justice according to the Deuteronomic charter – blessings for life and cursing for death – becomes a point of contention for poet and prophet alike. The psalmist laments, “Behold, these are the wicked; always at ease, they increase in riches. All in vain have I kept my heart clean and washed my hands in innocence  (Psa 73:12,13; cf. Job 21:7; Eccles 7:15, 8:14 ESV). The prophet Jeremiah remonstrates before the Lord, “Why does the way of the wicked prosper? Why do all who are treacherous thrive?  (Jer 12:1 ESV). In the providence of God, those under curse are permitted to flourish even as their response to God’s general grace towards creation serves to condemn their actions.[6] 
 Lee calls repeatedly for ‘a deeper understanding of biblical principles to lead us’ and cites a previous bishop of Gippsland in affirmation of same-sex relationships, especially where such unions exhibit fruit that might otherwise be attributed to the Spirit of God. Against the broader Scriptural narrative and in accordance with the, seemingly, paradoxical nature of God’s activities, it would be more accurate to say that such instances of flourishing do not automatically accord with divine intention for humanity. Instead we ought to heed the warning of Paul against a failure to acknowledge ‘the riches of [God’s] kindness, restraint, and patience,’ a failure to recognise ‘that God’s kindness is intended to lead you to repentance’ (Rom 2:4). 
 Blessing same-sex unions in Anglican Churches – the Book of Common Prayer exhorts the gathered congregation to consider whether the proposed union between the man and the woman is in accordance with God’s Word – according to God’s will for human beings. It is only once the relationship has been deemed to be in accordance with God’s will that any blessing over the couple can be pronounced. As has been shown, the biblical principle for blessing is that a person or persons are recognised to be living in accordance with God’s intentions for human beings in the world. Same-sex relationships, though they may have the appearance of flourishing, cannot be considered to be unions in accordance with God’s will for humanity. Therefore, it is not possible for Anglican Churches to recognise, consent to or otherwise ‘bless’ such unions. 
 Dumbrell, W. J. The Search for Order. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Books, 1994. 
 Goldingay, John. Israel’s Gospel. Vol. 1. Old Testament Theology. Downers Grove, Ill: IVP Academic, 2003. 
 Wenham, Gordon J. Genesis 1-15. Word Biblical Commentary 1. Waco, Tex: Word Bks, 1987. 
 [1] W. J. Dumbrell, The Search for Order (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Books, 1994), 20-22. 
 [2] See Rhys Bezzant, ‘To What End? The Blessing of Same-Sex Marriage’ in Doctrine Commission of General Synod Report, 2019. 
 [3] BDB and NIDOTTE note that certain forms of the Hebrew word to bless (brk) can mean curse. See 1 Kgs 21:10, 13; Job 1:5,11, 2:5, 2:9. 
 [4] Gordon J. Wenham, Genesis 1-15, Word Biblical Commentary 1 (Waco, Tex: Word Bks, 1987), 86-91. 
 [5] John Goldingay, Israel’s Gospel, vol. 1, Old Testament Theology (Downers Grove, Ill: IVP Academic, 2003), 177. 
 [6] See Calvin’s observation in commentary on Genesis 4 (John Calvin, Genesis, Biblical Commentaries (Albany, OR: AGES Software, 1997). 

 id="file23242567" filename="barnes-glorious-thought-ultimate-blessing-blessed-assurance" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.bladenjournal.com/features/church/41336/barnes-glorious-thought-ultimate-blessing-blessed-assurance">
 I refer to our column of two weeks ago. What links Horatio Spafford’s 1873 hymn, “It Is Well With My Soul,  Mercy Me’s present-day song of praise, “Even If,  and Daniel’s scriptural words in the Old Testament, “But if not… ? 
 The immediate, and correct, answer is “faith.  What is their faith in, exactly? We respond, “In God!  And we might reply, “in His will.  Praise God! Yes! All of those responses are correct replies. 
 Nonetheless, when we answer that way, we are usually thinking of answered prayers for healing of serious diseases, safety on the highway or on the streets, and in busy (often dangerous), public places, safety in the air and on the rails, protection from the COVID-19 variants, recovery from serious accidental injuries, and enough food, shelter, warmth, and medical care, for our families, and enough to help our neighbors, aren’t we? 
 Such concerns are important matters, and God gives us responsibility for striving alongside Him in attending to them. 
 All of the above is a true concern of faith. Still, what is our greatest faith need? What does each soul stand most in need of, from God? 
 Horatio Spafford’s text of “It Is Well With My Soul,  composed where his four young daughters had drowned, just days earlier, gives insight. Bearing crushing sorrow, which he compared in his first stanza to the rolling “sea billows  he gazed out upon as he wrote, and in great need of personal consolation, this Christian father concentrated, still, and most strongly, on the last three of his four stanzas, in which he named the deepest of all our needs. 
 And in those verses, he rejoiced in the “glorious tho’t  of our ultimate blessing, the “blest assurance  of salvation, and our gift of eternal life in Christ Jesus. 
 And, Lord, haste the day when my faith shall be sight, 
 The clouds be rolled back as a scroll: 
 The trump shall resound and the Lord shall descend, 
 “Even so  — it is well with my soul. 
 I repeat: Spafford named his, and our, deepest need — forgiveness of our sin, “not in part, but the whole, ; and our truest blessing, salvation and, for each of us, the “blest assurance … that Christ hath regarded my helpless estate, and hath shed His own blood for my soul.  Believing the Gospel, and clinging in trust to it, this man of faith rejoiced, even as he endured the worst of life’s injuries and losses. 
 In his thankful praise, Spafford revealed also our next, our second, deepest need, I believe I have learned; specifically, our need for hearts and spirits of gratitude to God, for His costly grace in forgiveness of our sin and for our salvation; gratitude like Spafford’s, “Praise the Lord, praise the Lord, O my soul!  Thanksgiving strengthened Horatio Spafford in his darkest suffering. 
 Spafford’s gratitude, even in grief, reminds us of David’s trust, which surely gave him inspiration. It reminds me of my mother’s shouting praise, despite the stillborn birth of the little son she had hoped to raise. 
 I want that kind of gratitude. 
 Spafford’s fourth stanza witnesses to and testifies of, trust and faith in the final, end-time consummation of God’s divine plan in eternity. At that time, Horatio Spafford knew and rejoiced, that the Resurrection will unite again his family, in eternal life with God. 
 There, rested this hymnist’s abiding belief, and his trusting assurance, of seeing his children again. There, rested my mother’s trust in God’s mercy, as she suffered her baby’s death and her own near-death from a gangrenous infection, but rising to shout her praise to God again. 
 Eulogizing his children in verse, Horatio Spafford gave Spirit-filled witness to the heart and core of Christian faith, through a hymn for all of us, and for all time. 
 It is well with my soul, 
 It is well, it is well with my soul. 
 Kenneth Osbeck wrote: “In 1881, the Spafford’s … left Chicago with their two young daughters and a group of friends and settled in Jerusalem. There they established the American Colony which cared for the sick and the destitute.  
 Hallelujah! 
 Thanks be to God. 
 Dr. Elizabeth Barnes is a retired professor emerita of Christian Theology and Ethics at the Baptist Theological Seminary in Richmond, Virginia, and a resident of White Lake. 

 id="file23242787" filename="BCP-Christianity.pdf" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.bc.edu/content/dam/files/centers/boisi/pdf/bc_papers/BCP-Christianity.pdf">
THE BOISI CENTER PAPERS ON RELIGION IN THE UNITED STATES

An Introduction to
Christian Theology
Thoughtful, constructive interreligious dialogue depends not only upon the openness of the dialogue
partners to diverse perspectives, but also upon a reliable foundation of correct information about the
various beliefs being discussed. For those who desire a basic understanding of the tenets of Christian
faith, this paper offers a brief history of Christianity and summarizes the central Christian beliefs in
God, Jesus Christ, the Trinity, the Bible and authority, sin and reconciliation, sacraments, spiritual
practices, and ethical living.

INTRODUCTION
This paper provides a primer on the basics of

remain in the background of how Christianity is

Christian theology as it is understood in the

perceived and practiced in the United States;

American context. It explains the major beliefs or

frequently, these details may not even be familiar

doctrines that are generally accepted by all

to American Christians themselves. Nevertheless,

Christians while also highlighting the theological

some knowledge of these particulars is essential

diversity of the Christian churches. In other words,

to

although all Christians adhere to the doctrines

Christianity.

ground

an

accurate

understanding

of

discussed here, various groups of Christians often
interpret

these

doctrines

differently.

These

This

paper

thus

provides

an

important

disagreements usually have historical roots; thus,

complement to the other papers in the Boisi

Christianity’s

is

Center series. In particular, since religious beliefs

inseparable from its doctrinal development. For

and religious practices always inform one another,

this reason, the paper gives an overview of

reading this paper together with the paper on

Christianity’s

before

Religious Practice in the United States is

moving into a discussion of the major Christian

recommended. The paper begins with a brief

beliefs.

historical outline of the beginnings and major

historical

historical

development

development

divisions of Christianity. It then summarizes the
As would be the case with any religious tradition,

Christian beliefs in God, Jesus Christ, the Trinity,

the complexity of Christian theology and history

the Bible and authority, sin and reconciliation,

cannot be explained fully in a brief paper. Many

sacraments, spiritual practices, and ethical living.

nuances of Christian theology and history tend to

A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHRISTIANITY
The history of Christianity unfolds organically

resurrection saved them from their sins. As their

through time. It is commonly understood to begin

conviction grew, they named Jesus the “Christ —

with Jesus, who was born two thousand years ago.

meaning Messiah or Anointed One—according to

However, because Jesus was Jewish, some date

the prophecies of the Jewish Bible, the Hebrew

Christianity’s roots much further back, to the

Scriptures (commonly known among Christians

beginnings of Judaism. To illustrate the vast

as the Old Testament). This is the origin of the

sweep of historical development, this section

name “Jesus Christ  and led to Jesus’ followers

proceeds in four parts. First, it addresses the roots

being called “Christians. 

of Christianity in the first through the third
centuries C.E. (“Common Era,  dating from the

After Jesus’ death, “Christians  became identified

time

it describes

as a particular sect within Judaism. These Jews

Christianity’s development through the Middle

believed that Jesus was the Messiah foretold in

Ages;

Protestant

their Hebrew Scriptures, whose coming they had

Reformations in the 1600s and their continuing

long anticipated. However, as time went on, the

influence today; fourth, focusing on the United

majority of Jews did not believe that Jesus was the

States, it summarizes several aspects of American

Messiah, and their differences with “Christian 

Protestantism.

Jews increased. Further, many non-Jewish people

of

Jesus’ birth); second,

third,

it

explores

the

did come to believe in Jesus. In this way,
“Christianity  gradually became

The Beginnings of Christianity (1-300 C.E.)

a

religious

movement distinct from Judaism, as it is practiced
Christianity began

as a

movement

today.

within

Judaism during the first century C.E. At this time,
the Jewish rabbi now known as Jesus of Nazareth

Over several generations, Christians compiled

undertook a public teaching ministry in which he

their collective memories of Jesus’ teachings and

preached about the imminent coming of the

sayings in various documents. Best known among

Kingdom of God. As reported in the Christian

these today are the four narratives of Jesus’ life,

Scriptures (commonly known among Christians

death, and resurrection that now appear in the

as the New Testament), Jesus assembled a core

Christian Scriptures, the “Gospels  of Matthew,

group of twelve Jewish disciples, along with many

Mark, Luke, and John. During these early years,

other followers. Together they ministered to the

many

poor and outcast in present-day Israel and

Christian communities about their belief in Jesus

Palestine. Around the year 33 C.E., Jesus was

as the Messiah and the way Christians should live

arrested and executed by the Roman governor.

and worship. The letters of the apostle Paul and a

However, Jesus’ followers claimed that he rose

few other authors were eventually included in the

from the dead; they came to believe that he was

Christian Scriptures along with the four Gospels.

the Son of God and that his death and

Christians debated for centuries over which
2

letters

were

also

circulated

among

documents to include in their scriptures; the first

unification in the fourth century under the reign

known list of the twenty-seven documents now

of Emperor Theodosius and through the theology

accepted as the Christian Scriptures did not

of Bishop Augustine of Hippo (b. 356-d. 430).

appear until the year 367 CE, and it may have

Almost seventy years after Constantine legalized

taken even longer before Christians universally

Christianity,

accepted this list.

Christian faith as the official religion of the

Theodosius

established

the

Roman Empire. From then on, Christianity
spread rapidly. Some converted to Christianity to

Further Development (300-1500 C.E.)

advance in Roman society or out of fear of Roman
Since their religious practices were distinguished

authorities, but many converted willingly. These

from Judaism only gradually, Christians of the

conversions catapulted Christianity forward as a

first and second centuries worshipped in small

leading religion of the Roman Empire, which

pockets throughout the Middle and Near East, and

then encompassed most of Europe and North

their religious practices differed from town to

Africa.

town. Moreover, Christianity was often outlawed
were

Shortly after Theodosius’ decree, Augustine

persecuted and executed for professing their faith.

became bishop of Hippo in North Africa. An adult

In the year 313 C.E., the Roman emperor

convert to Christianity, Augustine came to be one

Constantine

and

of the most influential theologians in the history

legalized it, virtually ending the persecutions.

of the Christian church. At this time, basic

Noticing that Christians disagreed with one

Christian

another on many important points, such as the

Augustine articulated much of his theology in

relationship of Jesus to God, and that these

response to competing interpretations of the faith

debates were causing unrest and confusion in his

and to non-Christian faiths of the fourth and fifth

empire, Constantine called Christian leaders

centuries. Through these conflicts, Augustine

(bishops) from across the empire to a council at

provided significant explorations of the Trinity and

Nicaea in 325 C.E. This first major council of the

human sinfulness, as well as the relationship

Christian churches clarified key points of theology,

between church and state. Augustine’s numerous

including the Trinity and the divinity of Jesus (see

writings greatly influenced Christian thought

discussion

from

under

Roman

law;

many

converted

below).

to

believers

Christianity

The

primary

written

the

beliefs

fifth

were

century

still

to

contested,

the

so

Protestant

Reformation of the sixteenth century and beyond.

contribution of this council was the Nicene Creed.
More debates followed in the succeeding years,
in

Despite his powerful influence, Augustine did not

Constantinople in 381 C.E., expanded this creed

end the disputes within Christianity. At the

into a longer statement of faith that members of

church councils, which continued to take place

many Christian churches still recite. (For the full

every 50-100 years, questions about

text of the creed, see Appendix.)

humanity and divinity—that is, his identity as the

and

the

second

great

council,

held

Jesus’

Son of God—proved an ongoing source of
Although lively debates over key theological points

controversy. As Christians from different areas of

continued,

the world drew on the philosophical traditions of

Christianity

underwent

further

3

their cultures to reflect upon these questions, the

The key figure of the German protest was a

most marked differences arose between Christian

Christian monk, Martin Luther (1483-1543). In 1517

leaders of the Latin West and those of the Greek

Luther wrote ninety-five theses criticizing various

East. In the year 1054 C.E., these disagreements

corruptions in the church, most notably its

culminated in the “Great Schism  that divided

practice of selling “indulgences.  In their original

Christianity into two major strands, Western and

form, indulgences were gifts offered to the church

Eastern. Today, Eastern Christianity includes the

by repentant sinners to show their gratitude to

Orthodox churches, while Western Christianity

God for the forgiveness of their sins. By the early

includes the Catholic and Protestant churches.

1500s, the practice had become corrupted, and it

Because the Orthodox Church in America

appeared that the Christian church was selling

accounts for only about one percent of Christians

forgiveness rather than merely accepting gifts

in the United States, this primer considers only

from the faithful. Luther criticized this practice for

Western Christianity from this point on.

de-emphasizing

repentance

and

making

Christians think they could buy God’s forgiveness.
Western Christianity flourished during the High

Instead, Luther preached that salvation is a gift

Middle Ages of eleventh- to thirteenth-century

from God that comes through faith alone upon

Europe. Christianity inspired exquisite art, music,

repentance for sin. Luther also objected to the

and architecture. As the first universities were

hierarchical structure of the Christian church,

established, Christian theology became highly

arguing that any Christian could interpret the

systematized, most notably in the works of

Bible and serve as a minister as well as any other;

Thomas Aquinas (b. 1225-d. 1274). The leader of

this idea is now known as the “priesthood of all

the Western Christian church, the pope, was a

believers.  His efforts at reform, however, met

major figure in European politics. During the

with resistance, and in 1522 Christian authorities

fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, however, the

condemned

papacy lost some of its moral authority due to

continued his attempts at reform, and his

widespread corruption in the church, and many

followers eventually formed a new Christian

Christians began to question the power of Rome.

group distinct from the original Western or

his

theological

claims.

Luther

“Catholic  church. These Christians became
The Emergence of Protestant Christianity (1500

known as “Lutherans  and remained most

C.E.-Present)

numerous in Germany. Today, in the United
States, Lutherans are one of the larger Protestant
denominations, numbering about five million.

These questions eventually led to another major
split within the Christian church in the early
sixteenth century. What is now known as

Other reformations closely followed Luther’s. The

Protestant Christianity first began to emerge in

most successful included the Calvinist, English,

present-day Germany, where Christians protested

and radical reformations; these

(hence the name “Protestant ) corruption in the

eventually resulted in several new churches. (As a

Christian church.

result of these and subsequent divisions, the

movements

various Christian churches are distinguished by
differences in theology and worship practices and

4

as “denominations. ) The

Anabaptists refused to baptize infants, instead

Calvinists took their name from the French

deferring baptism until people were old enough to

lawyer and theologian John Calvin (1509-1564),

request it. In the United States today, Quakers

who fled the Catholic city of Paris to avoid

and Mennonites trace their origins to Anabaptists.

persecution for his religious ideas. He eventually

Most have adopted a modern lifestyle, but small

settled in the thoroughly Protestant city of Geneva.

numbers within these denominations live in

While several of Calvin’s ideas paralleled Luther’s,

isolated communities, witnessing to their faith by

Calvin advocated a closer relationship between

dressing simply and preserving traditional ways of

church and state than Luther. (For more on the

living. One well-known example is the Amish

relationship between church and state in the U.S.,

community in Pennsylvania. In the United States

see the paper on Separation of Church and State.)

today, groups who trace their beginnings to the

Calvin’s

Radical Reformation are much smaller in

are

now known

ideas

influenced

many

Western

comparison to other Christian denominations.

Europeans, including an English group known as
the Puritans. The Puritans immigrated across the
Atlantic in the late seventeenth century; as a

These

result, the United States has a strong Reformed-

Anglicans,

Calvinist tradition. Several present-day American

original manifestations of Protestant Christianity

Protestant

Presbyterians,

as distinct from Catholic Christianity. In response

Congregationalists, and the Reformed Church in

to the Protestant reformations, the Catholic

America, have Calvinist roots.

church

groups,

including

four

groups—Lutherans,
and

adopted

Calvinists,

Anabaptists—represent

some

minor

reforms

the

and

reaffirmed certain teachings, most notably at the
The English Reformation began in 1529 with

Council of Trent (1545-1563); this response became

King Henry VIII’s decision to annul his marriage

known

in defiance of the pope’s orders. To justify his

Structurally, however, the Catholic church has

annulment in religious terms, Henry established

continued until the present time in much the

the English or “Anglican  church, making

same form as it had in the Middle Ages; Roman

himself the titular head. This church eventually

Catholic churches in the United States are part of

adopted a blend of Catholic and Protestant ideas;

the worldwide Roman Catholic Church.

as

the

“Counter-Reformation. 

the Thirty-Nine Articles, written in the latter years
the

Protestant denominations continued to multiply

principles of Anglican theology. In the United

in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

States

Drawing on and further adapting Reformation

of

the

sixteenth
today,

the

century,

summarize

Episcopalian

church

has

ideas, additional groups such as Wesleyans, which

Anglican roots.

includes Methodists and some Pentecostals,
The Anabaptists, whose movement is called the

Restorationists, namely the Churches of Christ

“Radical Reformation,  separated themselves

and Disciples of Christ, and Baptists organized in

more definitively from the Roman faith than the

England and the United States. Baptists are now

Lutherans or Calvinists. Anabaptists rejected

the largest Protestant denominational group in

some traditional worship practices that Lutherans

the United States, with about forty-seven million

and

people

Calvinists

continued.

Most

notably,

5

claiming

membership in

American,

Southern, or independent Baptist churches. (For a

beliefs,

while

the

discussion of the status in the United States of

denominations do not.

more

evangelical

religions other than Christianity, see the paper on
Religious Pluralism in the United States.)

Fundamentalist Christianity

Contemporary Protestant Christianity in the

Another term sometimes used to describe certain

United States

Christians—and people of other faiths, including
Muslims—is fundamentalist. This term refers to

In the contemporary United States, Christians

people who maintain a literalist interpretation of

and

often

described

as

their

“fundamentalist, 

“liberal, 

or

Christianity, fundamentalist Protestants share

“conservative,  or some combination of these

the evangelical emphasis on Jesus Christ but

terms. Each term is controversial and freighted

shun participation in American politics and

with subtext. This section begins to unpack these

culture. Also, they often insist upon a literal

descriptions.

interpretation

their

beliefs

“evangelical, 

are

religious

faith.

of the

Within

Bible,

American

whereas other

Christians understand some parts of the Bible to
be symbolic or metaphorical. Not all Christian

Evangelical Christianity

evangelicals

are

fundamentalists,

Christian

movement known as evangelicalism. The meaning

insofar as they embrace the three foundational

of the term “evangelical  is commonly used to

beliefs described above. In the United States today,

describe

Christian fundamentalists constitute a small but

churches

that

stress

are

all

American Protestantism is often associated with a

Protestant

fundamentalists

but

evangelicals

vocal minority of the Christian population.

evangelization, or converting non-Christians to
faith in Jesus. As a general rule, evangelicals

Liberal and Conservative Christianity

stress three core beliefs: Christianity requires
conversion or “rebirth  through a personal
spiritual encounter with Jesus Christ; Christians

Various

must witness their faith to or “evangelize 

sometimes characterized as liberal or conservative.

Christians and non-Christians alike; the Bible is

Some denominations even contain both liberal

directly inspired by God. Many other Christians,

and conservative groups. Generally speaking,

such as Lutherans, Presbyterians, and Catholics,

liberal Christians accept historical and scientific

also share these three beliefs; thus, evangelicals

information that calls into question the literal

can be members of almost any denomination.

truth of some biblical stories, while conservatives

However, some denominations, such as Baptists

are typically less convinced that such knowledge is

and Wesleyans, are more evangelical than others,

relevant to faith. For example, liberals typically

such as Catholics and Lutherans. One major

acknowledge the theory of evolution as a credible

distinction

explanation of life’s origins, while conservatives

is

that

the

denominations

tend

to

less

evangelical

Christian

denominations

are

also

formal

adhere to a literal interpretation of the biblical

doctrine as similar in importance to the three core

account of creation. In contrast to conservatives,

emphasize

liberals also tend to display more openness toward

6

cultural attitudes about social problems and hold

conservative tendencies. Clearly, the distinctions

a more positive view of human nature.

go far beyond the simple division between
Catholic and Protestant. Nevertheless, basic

American

Christianity

contains

similarities in theology and practice remain; the

many

next section explains these.

denominations that can be grouped according to
evangelical,

fundamentalist,

liberal,

and

BASIC CONCEPTS IN CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY
Given this brief history of Christianity, one can

This

imagine the difficulty of summarizing the basics

understanding of the sacraments, as will be

of

explained in a later section.

Christian

theology.

Yet

Catholics

and

is

evident

particularly

through

their

Protestants are all Christians, and they do share
some basic and vital similarities in their religious

What does it mean to understand God as both in

beliefs and practices. They worship a monotheistic

and beyond the world? On the one hand, God is

God, manifested in Trinitarian form; they believe

beyond

that all humans are sinners, saved from their sin

comprehension. Christians, not unlike Muslims,

by the grace of God through Jesus; they profess

stand in awe of the majesty and dominion of God

that the Bible is God’s word; they regard worship

over the earth. Christians proclaim that just as the

and prayer as important; they share sacramental

human eye cannot look directly into the sun, so

practices; and they attempt to lead ethical lives.

human beings cannot comprehend the full

The following summaries of each of these points

magnificence of God. On the other hand, the Bible

offer an introductory but by no means exhaustive

is filled with earthly analogies for God, such as a

description of these core beliefs.

parent, a shepherd, a woman searching for a lost

direct

human

experience

and

coin, a king, and even a mother hen. So Christians
also believe God loves humanity like a shepherd

God

tending a flock or a parent caring for children. The
Christians believe in a God who is omnipresent.

challenge for Christians is to maintain a balanced

This God is understood as both immanent, or

view of God as both in and outside of the world—to

present within the world, and transcendent,

remember that although they believe God cares

having an existence far beyond the world and

for them tenderly as a mother, God also remains a

beyond human imagination and experience.

mystery beyond their comprehension. Thus,

Christians believe that individual persons and

Christians commonly feel reverence, love, and

groups can enjoy a personal relationship with God,

trust towards God: they recognize God’s wondrous

but that God always remains a mystery beyond

majesty, yet they are also grateful for God’s

human understanding. Catholics and Protestants

merciful and intimate concern for them and the

share this view of God, although Catholics often

entire world.

stress God’s immanence more than Protestants.

7

Christian perceptions of God come primarily from

Christianity. These documents describe the early

the scriptures. The Hebrew Scriptures represent

communities’ faith in the message of Jesus’

God as Lord of all, the one true deity of the cosmos.

ministry and how they spread this message.

The Christian Scriptures continue to emphasize
the monotheism of the Hebrew Scriptures,

The Christian Scriptures report that there was no

describing God as underived and unsurpassable.

consensus about who Jesus was during his

In the Gospels, for example, Jesus teaches only

human lifetime, even among those who knew

according

Christians

him. Although, even during his ministry, his

emphasize God’s reign over all that is. In doing so,

disciples are sometimes portrayed as believing he

they believe they are faithful to the scriptures

was the Messiah and the son of God, other people

(both Hebrew and Christian) and to Jesus’

thought he was a prophet or simply a great

teachings. Indeed, according to Christian tradition,

teacher. In a gradual process that began during

sin is defined as turning away from God.

Jesus’ ministry and continued for many years after

to

God’s

authority.

his death and resurrection, his followers came to
Alluding to Jesus, however, raises questions about

believe that he was the son of God. The gradual

the Christian claim to monotheism. Christians

development of this belief is evident in the

are distinguished from other monotheists by their

Christian

belief in Jesus as the divine son of God. Non-

documents that describe the worship practices of

Christians correctly ask: if Christians believe that

early Christian communities. As noted, the

Jesus is the son of God and worship him as God,

earliest Christians were Jews who continued to

how can they claim to be monotheists? The

believe

answer, for Christians, is found in the doctrine of

Christians

the Trinity. To understand the Trinity, it is best

understand Jesus’ promise, recorded in the

first to consider the Christian belief in Jesus as

Gospels, that he would continue to be with them

human

earliest

even when they could no longer see him, and that

Christians’ understanding of Jesus was what

he would send his spirit to them as well. Gradually,

prompted the development of the doctrine of the

through much prayer, worship, and discussion,

Trinity.

Christians came to believe that God was now with

and

divine,

because

the

in

Scriptures

their

and

other

monotheistic

remembered

and

historical

God.

These

struggled

to

them in three distinct ways: the “Father  or God
of the Hebrew Scriptures, Jesus the Son, and the

Jesus Christ

Spirit.
Christians’ beliefs about Jesus are based in
and other historical artifacts and

Centuries passed before Christians officially

documents. Since few of these other documents

decided that they could believe that Jesus was

contain information about Jesus, most knowledge

divine without sacrificing their belief in one God.

comes from the Christian Scriptures. As noted,

How could this be? At the great councils of Nicaea,

the four Gospels tell the story of Jesus’ life and

Chalcedon, and beyond, Christians determined

ministry,

Christian

that Jesus was both fully human and fully divine.

Scriptures includes letters written by the apostle

They argued that only God could save humans, but

Paul and others from the first generations of

only a human should pay the debt owed to God for

scripture

while

the

rest

of the

8

The Trinity

sin. Thus, they came to believe that Jesus
experienced the fullness of human existence—
including birth, life, and death—yet was also

While the above subsection explains how the early

divine. Christians respect Jesus’ mother Mary as

Christians’ experience and memories of Jesus led

the “Mother of God  because she gave birth to

them to believe that God was present with them in

God’s own son. Christians believe that God

three ways, the doctrine of the Trinity remains

became human in Jesus to provide access to God’s

one of the most difficult points of Christian

grace, and Christians view Jesus as the ideal

theology to explain. Again, according to this

human being, the full revelation of God’s plan for

doctrine, God is one being who is revealed to

humanity. Because of their faith in Jesus,

human beings in three ways: Father, Son (Jesus),

Christians believe that God is with them, loves

and Spirit. In light of this assertion, Christian

them and saves them from sin and death, and will

monotheism is easily challenged. If the God of the

raise them to eternal life. In the end, Jesus’

Hebrew Scriptures is God, and Jesus is God, and

simultaneous divinity and humanity is a mystery

the Spirit is God, how can Christians claim to

that Christians confess in faith, although they

believe in one God and not three?

cannot fully explain it.
In light of their encounters with Jesus, the early
Christians also believe that Jesus brings God’s

Christians—who

forgiveness of sin to humanity. Christians call this

monotheistic roots—came to believe that the

“salvation  or “atonement.  “Salvation  means

trinitarian nature of God was compatible with

that sin is taken away and people are reconciled

monotheism. They remembered, as recorded in

with God. While all Christians believe that Jesus

the Christian Scriptures, that Jesus had a unique

accomplished this, no consensus has been

relationship with God, whom he called his father;

reached among Christians about how exactly he

that Jesus had promised to be with them even

did so, as the scriptures describe it in various ways.

after he was no longer visible to them; and that

For example, the word “atonement  usually refers

Jesus had said he would also send his Spirit to

specifically to the belief that it was Jesus’ death on

them. Christians believed the Spirit did come to

the cross that accomplished the taking away of

them at Pentecost, an event chronicled in the

sins; the cross thus symbolizes both human guilt

Christian Scriptures. As time went on, Christians

and God’s mercy. However, some Christians object

also began to notice that several passages in their

to “atonement theology  on the grounds that it

scriptures could be interpreted as describing

portrays God as a cruel and irresponsible parent,

distinctions within God. For example, the Gospels

condemning a child to a horrible death. These

instruct Christians to be baptized “in the name of

Christians prefer to emphasize Jesus’ teaching

the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. 

and healing ministry as reconciling people with

In this way, over several centuries, the doctrine of

God

tragedy

the Trinity slowly took shape. As noted above, it

perpetrated by sinful people, not intended by God.

was first officially formulated in the creed of the

Despite these differences, all Christians believe

Council of Nicaea in 325 and developed further at

that through Jesus, God saves them from sin and

Constantinople in 381.

and

consider

Jesus’

death

a

promises them eternal life.

9

maintained

their

Jewish

The Bible and Church Authority

Of course, the councils did not end debate over the
Trinity. Given that the idea is difficult to
comprehend, Christians have explained it with

Catholics and Protestants alike view the Bible as

varying degrees of success. At times it has

the revealed word of God and the primary

degenerated into a belief in God as three distinct

authority for Christian life and worship. All

divine beings or as one God revealed in different

Christians respect the ability of individual persons

ways at different times. Such conceptions of the

to read and interpret the Bible for themselves, but

Trinity have given rise to charges of polytheism. In

they do so in various ways. On the one hand,

general, Christian theologians have succeeded

Protestant churches tend to follow a central

better at saying what the Trinity is not than at

principle of the sixteenth-century Reformations in

explaining what it is. Briefly, however, the three

assigning

persons can be described as follows:

Christians to interpret the Bible for themselves.

God the

the

absolute
other

authority

hand,

individual

“Father  is the creator of all that is; God the “Son 

On

is Jesus, who became human and came to earth;

emphasizes that individual Christians who are

God the “Spirit  is the wisdom of God whom Jesus

reading the Bible should also consider the long

sent to be with humans after he left the earth.

tradition of church interpretation of scripture.

Theologians and mystics have understood these

When

three persons of the Trinity to have various names.

interpretation of the Bible, further exploration of

The most commonly used are Father, Son, and

each one’s notion of church is needed. This section

Spirit; others include Creator, Redeemer, and

gives a general account of the theology behind the

Sanctifier, and Mother, Daughter, and Wisdom.

different Christian churches. (For a description of

considering

the

to

Catholic

Catholic

and

church

Protestant

the varieties of religious worship and expression
In sum, the Christian view of the Trinity is that

among Christians, see the paper on Religious

the one eternal God is manifest in three ways.

Practice.)

Christians believe that God has one nature, and
that nature is to be relational; thus, the three

Generally speaking, Protestants view church as a

divine “persons  are believed not only to exist in

group of Christian believers who come together to

Christians’ experiences of God but also to

worship God and support each other in their

correspond to real distinctions within God. How

efforts to live a Christian life. Scripture serves as

exactly this works remains a mystery. A common

the final spiritual authority of the church; it is

way to understand the Trinity is by analogy. For

interpreted individually by each member as well

example, consider the several roles a single

as collectively by the group. According to Luther’s

woman may occupy. She may be a daughter, a wife,

principle of the priesthood of all believers, any

and a mother. In each of these roles, she functions

individual may be called forth by the community

differently in relationship to the people around

to serve as its spiritual leader or pastor. The pastor

her. She remains one woman, yet at the same

is not assumed to have a special understanding of

time, real differences in her own personhood

the Bible compared to the other church members.

correspond to her various roles. Similarly, for

Since they understand church as a particular

Christians, the one eternal God is three persons

community of believers, Protestants—especially

sharing one divine nature.

evangelical

10

Protestants—tend

to

read

and

interpret the Bible as relevant to their current

of the individual parishes, decide who will serve as

situation with less attention to how it has been

priest for each parish. The bishop of Rome is

interpreted in the past.

known as the pope, and he serves as the symbolic
head of the worldwide Catholic church. As the

Some Protestant churches, such as Lutherans,

“first among equals,  the pope is considered to be

Methodists, and especially Episcopalians, proceed

the successor of Peter. Catholics do not worship

formally in training and assigning their leaders.

the pope—only God is worshiped—but they do

In the Episcopalian church, which as noted is

hold the office of the papacy in very high esteem

theologically a blend of Catholic and Protestant

because it symbolizes the unity of the worldwide

principles, leaders succeed one another in a

Catholic church.

formal fashion similar to that of the Catholic
church. This “apostolic succession  is connected

As noted, like Protestants, Catholics believe that

theologically back to Peter, one of Jesus’ closest

any Christian can read and interpret the Bible.

followers who is now considered the first bishop of

However,

Rome (i.e., the pope). In these Protestant churches,

understanding of the church as a community that

as in the more

evangelical churches, the

includes all believers, even those who have died,

emphasis in scriptural interpretation is usually on

contemporary interpretations of scripture take

its present meaning, not on a tradition of past

into account past interpretations. The Catholic

interpretation. However, they do have a long

tradition of successive church leadership dates

history of scholarly biblical interpretation. A

back to before most people were literate, when

difference is that when major disagreements over

only priests and bishops could actually read and

scriptural

these

had to interpret the Bible for the people. Often

denominations will call general meetings to

these interpretations were written down and have

discuss them, whereas less highly organized

been preserved as the collective wisdom of the

evangelical churches are more likely simply to

church. Because official church leaders and those

split and form new churches along these lines.

trained in church history and theology have a

interpretation

arise,

in

accordance

with

the

Catholic

broad knowledge of this historical tradition of
In contrast to most Protestants, Catholics define

scriptural interpretation, their opinions also carry

church as a much larger community. For Catholics,

weight with individual Catholics as they read the

church includes not only the believers in a

scriptures. Thus, the Catholic church has a long

particular faith community, but also all Catholics

tradition of scriptural interpretation.

around the world and even all believers who have
died and whose souls are believed to be with God.

In the end, however, the Catholic church

The Catholic church has a very formal training or

emphasizes the final authority of the individual

“ordination  process for its leaders; its leadership

conscience. It teaches that individual Catholics

consists of a hierarchical structure of priests, who

who sincerely pray and study the scriptures should

lead individual parishes, and bishops, who lead all

follow their consciences regarding

the parishes in a given region (for example, all the

matters, even if they disagree with church leaders

Catholic parishes in eastern Massachusetts are

and even if—as sometimes happens in extreme

headed by one bishop). Bishops, not the members

circumstances—this

11

leads

to

spiritual

their

excommunication from the church. This option of

Protestants

profess

“the

priesthood

of

all

legitimate disagreement with church leaders is

believers  and stress contemporary interpretation

called “dissent.  Depending on the issue and on

of the Bible, while Catholics and some Protestants

who is dissenting, church leaders treat dissent as

also respect the long tradition of scriptural

more or less of a problem. For example, many

interpretation, including the teaching ability of

Catholics disagree with the church’s official

church leaders and theologians. The authority

position on the issue of birth control, and this has

and legitimacy of a Protestant church or leader

not been considered serious enough to merit

often correlates only to adherence to the Bible,

punishment. However, a few American bishops

while for Catholics, tradition is an important part

have attempted to discipline prominent Catholic

of both biblical interpretation and the appointing

politicians who deviate from the church’s strict

of church leaders.

anti-abortion stance. The tradition of dissent
shows that although Catholics place more weight

While all Christians understand the Bible as the

than Protestants on church tradition as an

authority for Christian life, they differ over the

important part of scriptural interpretation, all

question of the Bible’s “inerrancy.  Representing

Christians ultimately rely on the Bible and their

the far ends of the spectrum are Catholics and

consciences as the final spiritual authority in

fundamentalist Protestants. Catholics believe the

living the Christian life.

Bible was inspired by God but composed by various
people over many centuries, so they view

Traditional Catholic teachings derive from and

inconsistencies and contradictions as a result of

are interdependent with scripture. Catholics

human

regard the sacred writings of the Bible as the

Catholics, the challenge is to determine which

inspired word of God, written by humans who

passages are directly relevant and which must be

were guided by the Holy Spirit. For Catholics, the

reinterpreted. Fundamentalist Protestants believe

Bible is not free from human error, yet it

that God’s inspiration of the scriptures means that

nevertheless constitutes the record of God’s

everything recorded in them is literally true and

revelation and design for the world. Catholic

free from error, or “inerrant ; they consider the

tradition helps distinguish the divine elements

Bible to be directly applicable to contemporary life.

from the human elements in the Bible. For

Evangelical, conservative, and liberal Protestants

instance, Catholics (and most Protestants) now

fall between these two extremes. Evangelical and

interpret the biblical justification of slavery as a

conservative Protestants typically understand the

function of a past historical era, and they are

Bible as inspired by God, with any apparent errors

certain that slavery is contrary to God’s will. In this

representing

way, tradition provides guidance for Catholics.

struggle to understand; liberal Protestants tend to

fallibility

or

mysteries

cultural

that

change.

humans

For

must

see inconsistencies as due to human error and
cultural change.

In sum, both Protestants and Catholics believe
that the church is composed of humans gathered
together to confess their faith in Jesus and
worship God. All Christians agree that the Bible is
the primary authority for Christian life. Most

12

as the “Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of

Sin and Reconciliation

Justification,  which

was published

by the

In accordance with their reading of the Bible,

Lutheran and Catholic churches, show that this

Christians believe that human beings were

particular difference is being resolved.

originally created in the image of God, meaning
Sacraments

that they were completely good. However, people
used their free will to turn away from God,
following their own desires rather than God’s will.

In Christian worship, sacraments are ritual

This gave rise to a universal human tendency

practices that are believed to bring people into

toward evil that Christians call “original sin ;

tangible

individual sinful acts are believed to be rooted in

understood as visible signs of God’s grace. When a

this condition. Despite their sinfulness, Christians

sacrament is performed, prayers are said and

believe humans are still the image of God;

elements such as water, wine, bread, and oil may

Catholics hold a more optimistic view than

be

Protestants about the extent to which the image

sacraments, while Catholics, in accordance with

remains present. Although humans retain a

their greater emphasis on God’s immanence,

tremendous capacity for good, the tendency

celebrate seven. Almost all Christians observe the

towards sin often outweighs the impulse towards

sacraments of baptism

good. This leads to a universal human need for

Catholics,

salvation from sin and reconciliation with God.

confirmation,

union

with

God.

Sacraments

used. Protestants usually celebrate

the

other

and
five

matrimony,

are

two

Eucharist. For
are

holy

confession,
orders,

and

anointing of the sick. Thus, sacraments often
Christians understand reconciliation with God as

mark important epochs in a Christian’s life. This

something accomplished by Jesus and accepted by

section describes the sacraments of baptism and

the Christian in faith. As noted in the section on

Eucharist.

Jesus, his life, death, and resurrection reveal God’s
love and mercy. And as the Reformations stressed,

Baptism celebrates a person’s entrance into the

forgiveness of sins (also called justification) also

Christian family. In some denominations, such as

comes from God as a gift; it has nothing to do with

Catholicism

human achievements. Catholics and Protestants

baptized

share this view of justification as a free gift offered

performed when the person requests it. According

through Jesus and accepted in faith. While all

to the Christian Scriptures, the tradition of

Christians also agree that faith should lead to

baptism began with Jesus, who, following a Jewish

living a Christian life, or performing “good

custom, was baptized with water at the start of his

works,  they sometimes disagree about the

ministry. Since then, Christians have been

relationship of faith and works. In particular,

baptized to symbolize their new identity as God’s

Catholics

have

children as they commence lives as Christians. At

emphasized the need to grow in faith by doing

a baptism, the person being baptized—or, if an

good works, while other Christians such as

infant, the person’s parents—affirms his or her

Lutherans have stressed the distinction between

belief in the Trinitarian God. Water is then

faith and works. However, recent documents such

sprinkled on the person’s head, or the person may

and

evangelical

Protestants

13

and

Lutheranism,

people

are

as infants; in others, baptism is

be fully immersed in water, to symbolize the

body and blood or actually become Jesus’ body and

washing away of sin. The baptized person enters

blood.

the Christian life as a new creature, freed from

Reformers had diverse understandings of the

original sin. This freedom is not experienced fully

Eucharist. Luther taught the Real Presence of

in earthly life; Christians do not claim that they no

Christ in the Eucharist but declined to speculate

longer sin after baptism. Rather, they are

about exactly what this meant. Anglicans held that

confident that God forgives their sins, and with

Christ was present in the bread and wine “in a

faith in their reconciliation with God through

heavenly sense,  while Calvin maintained that

Jesus, they try to perform only good works. When

the sacrament served simply to remind believers

they fail, they remember God’s forgiveness as

of Jesus’ death. Meanwhile, Catholics retained the

symbolized at their baptism and try to do better.

medieval doctrine of transubstantiation, the idea

In

particular,

the

sixteenth-century

that the bread and wine are transformed into
The Eucharist, usually known among Protestants

Jesus’ body and blood. Today, while

as the Lord’s Supper or communion, is the second

Protestants and Catholics observe the Eucharist,

sacrament Christians celebrate regularly. In

most Protestant churches teach that the bread and

Catholic churches the Eucharist is celebrated

wine somehow symbolize Jesus’ presence; the

daily, while

may only

Catholic church, here interpreting the Bible more

celebrate it every week or once a month. The

literally, still teaches that the bread and wine

Eucharist is usually celebrated within the context

mysteriously become the body and blood of Christ.

Protestant

churches

both

of a worship service; it reenacts the final meal
Jesus ate with his followers before his death. The

In addition to baptism and Eucharist, the other

Christian Scriptures report that at this meal,

five sacraments celebrated in the Catholic church

which was a Jewish Passover feast, Jesus broke

are reconciliation (confession and forgiveness of

bread and raised a cup of wine. He declared that

sins), confirmation (the adult decision to remain

the bread and wine were his body and blood, given

part of the church), marriage, holy orders or

to his followers for the forgiveness of sin, and he

“ordination,  and anointing of the sick. These

instructed the disciples to eat and drink in this

sacraments mark major milestones in the life of

manner in memory of him. Accordingly, in

faith.

Christian worship, the minister (pastor or priest)

milestones and even use similar terms to describe

takes bread and wine, repeats the words Jesus

them, but they do not consider these events to be

spoke, and invites all believers to consume the

“sacraments.  This practice dates back to Luther,

bread and wine in remembrance of Jesus.

who

Many

Protestants

emphasized

the

also

mark

individual’s

these

direct

relationship with God over the role of church
leaders.

Christians have long debated about whether the
Eucharistic bread and wine only symbolize Jesus’

14

CHRISTIAN SPIRITUAL PRACTICES: WORSHIP AND PRAYER
Communal worship—informal or formal services

sermon. Christian worship services usually last

during which Christians gather to offer praise and

between sixty and ninety minutes but may be

thanksgiving to God—is central to all Christian

longer or shorter. (For more on Christian worship

denominations. Communal worship may occur

practices, see the paper on Religious Practice in

throughout

the United States.)

the

week,

but

Catholics

and

Protestants usually attend services on Sunday
mornings. The style of these services differs

Because Christians believe in a personal God who

greatly among the denominations.

listens to individuals, and because Jesus instructs
his followers to pray in the Christian Scriptures,

The Catholic Mass is a liturgical celebration that

Christians pray to sustain their relationship with

includes songs of praise, formal prayers, readings

God. Prayer takes many forms, including the

from the Hebrew and Christian Scriptures, a talk

ritualized prayers of worship services, personal

by the priest interpreting the scriptures called the

prayer, group prayer, and even Bible study. Prayers

“sermon  or “homily,  the recitation of the

may be silent or spoken aloud; contemplative,

Nicene-Constantinopolitan

the

nonverbal forms of prayer are also practiced.

sacrament of Eucharist. The Mass is often

Intercessory prayer, asking others to pray on one’s

described as “high church  because of the strict

behalf, is also common. For Catholics, as noted,

organization of the liturgy, the formal prayers,

the church includes all believers, even those who

and the ceremonial robes worn by the priest.

have died; therefore, Catholics sometimes ask

Creed,

and

saints, including Mary, the mother of God, to
Protestant worship ranges from “high church  to

“intercede  with God on their behalf. Among all

“low church  forms. Lutheran and Episcopal

Christians, the Lord’s Prayer or “Our Father, 

services are quite similar to the Catholic Mass,

which Jesus teaches his disciples to pray in the

while evangelical worship often consists more

Gospels, is the most-recited prayer. (For the text of

simply of singing, a scripture reading, and a

the Lord’s Prayer, see the Appendix.)

ETHICAL CHRISTIAN LIVING
How do these fundamentals of Christian theology

Jesus teaches in the Gospels that Christians are to

transfer into action in the lives of Christians? The

love God and to love their neighbors as themselves,

answer is complex, for the multiple expressions of

whether the neighbor be friend or enemy.

Christian faith give rise to various understandings

Christians do not always succeed in following this

of the ethical Christian life. In general, however,

command; however, it is manifested in the
15

Christian

ideals

of

vocation,

justice,

insufficient income or satisfaction; when injustice

and

prevents a person from undertaking her or his

missionary activity.

proper vocation, that injustice should be resisted.
Again, however, from the Christian perspective,

Vocation

the

complexities

and

burdens

any work

that

of

work

Like everyone else, Christians must work to earn a

notwithstanding,

serves

the

living, and most do not have jobs in churches. Yet

neighbor and the common good can also serve

vocation refers to the idea that people serve God

God.

through their everyday work. How does the
Justice

ordinary labor of Christians relate to their
spiritual lives? Put simply, Christians believe that
any work that serves the neighbor and the

The command to love one’s neighbor also

community—the “common good —also serves

captures the primary ethical position of Christians.

God. Virtually any labor can become an extension

As noted, this ideal, which Christians strive for but

of Christian faith. The work of doctors, lawyers,

often fail to reach, comes from a scriptural

and politicians has no greater spiritual value than

command of Jesus. The Gospels record Jesus’ own

that of carpenters, trash collectors, and cab drivers;

love for his neighbors and his concern for justice:

what matters is their faithful exercise for the

Jesus cares for the poor, the sick, and the outcasts

benefit of others. This idea extends to Christians’

of society, and he speaks out against the political,

personal lives as well; Christians have an

social, and economic circumstances that worsen

obligation to serve relatives and friends charitably

their plight. Christians today are called to imitate

and responsibly. Of course, Christians do not

Jesus, working to transform the world through

always remember to conceive of their work in this

love and advocacy for justice, as they themselves

fashion and sometimes adopt the idea that certain

have been transformed by the love and forgiveness

kinds of work are inherently more valuable. But

of God.

the Christian idea of vocation is that any good
Christians recognize that their efforts to emulate

work, done well, serves God.

Jesus will always fall short, but this does not
Christians also use the word “vocation  to refer to

excuse them from striving to obey this ethical

the work for which a person seems particularly

imperative

well suited, due to their abilities. Vocations are

circumstances in which they find themselves. For

not always easily determined nor are they always

example, Christians should respect the dignity of

easy. Many people spend much of their lives trying

every human being by trying never to exploit

to identify their talents and how best to use them.

persons, groups, or nations as means to an end.

Moreover, like anyone else, Christians do not

And when conflict arises—whether it is an

always enjoy their work; sometimes, for reasons

argument between two people or the possibility of

beyond

of

international war—Christians should always

education, skill level, or physical ailments—they

exhaust all nonviolent options of reconciliation.

are engaged in unsatisfying jobs. The Christian

Because Christians, like all people, are not perfect,

understanding of vocation does not excuse

they do not always live up to this “love principle 

their

immediate

control—lack

16

as

well

as

they

can

in

the

and they are not always just in their actions and

God and eternal life, they are eager to share their

attitudes. Nevertheless, they are obligated to try.

faith with everyone. At its best, Christian
evangelism is an act of love—the ultimate

Missionary Activity

obedience to the command to love one’s neighbor.

The Christian life is also distinguished by

Christian evangelism often causes controversy.

missionary activity, also known as evangelism. In

Non-believers and adherents of other faiths—and

the Gospels, Jesus commands his followers to

even

spread the good news about God to the whole

perceive

world. Christians believe this task is ongoing. The

arrogant, often with good reason. Christian

task of spreading the Gospel intertwines with the

missionary activity has even become associated

Christian understanding of vocation and justice.

with Western imperialism, also with good reason.

Exercising one’s vocation and working toward

As a result, there is no consensus about the most

justice model the Christian faith for non-

appropriate and respectful way to introduce non-

Christians, and as such they constitute a form of

Christians to Christianity. Yet the Christian

indirect evangelism. However, “evangelism  is

desire to spread the faith is not unique. Most of

usually associated with direct efforts to tell non-

the major religious traditions of the world have

Christians about Jesus in the hope of converting

attempted to increase their ranks through various

them to the Christian faith. Because Christians

forms of missionary activity.

some

Christians

evangelism

as

themselves—tend
self-righteous

to
and

believe that Jesus is the way to reconciliation with

CONCLUSION
The goal of this paper has been to familiarize the

important challenge for all people of faith is to

reader

of

learn about religions different from their own.

Christianity and the basic theological tenets of

Meeting that challenge may be the surest path to

this

peaceful coexistence among people of different

with

religion.

the

historical

Further

development

exploration

of these

faiths.

concepts is encouraged. In today’s world, an

17

APPENDIX
The Lord’s Prayer (“Our Father ):
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy

Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our

name.

debts as we forgive our debtors.

Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it

Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from

is in heaven.

evil. Amen.

The Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed (381 C.E.):
We believe in one God,

he suffered death and was buried.

the Father, the Almighty,

On the third day he rose again

maker of heaven and earth,

in accordance with the Scriptures;

of all that is, seen and unseen.

he ascended into heaven
and is seated at the right hand of the Father.

We believe in one Lord, Jesus Christ,

He will come again in glory to judge the living and

the only Son of God,

the dead,

eternally begotten of the Father,

and his kingdom will have no end.

God from God, light from light,
true God from true God,

We believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the giver of

begotten, not made,

life, who proceeds from the Father [and the Son],

of one Being with the Father;

who with the Father and the Son is worshiped and

through him all things were made.

glorified,

For us and for our salvation

who has spoken through the prophets.

he came down from heaven,

We believe in one holy, catholic, and apostolic

was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin

church.

Mary

We acknowledge one baptism for the forgiveness of

and became truly human.

sins.

For our sake he was crucified under Pontius

We look for the resurrection of the dead,

Pilate;

and the life of the world to come. Amen.

ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
In order to provide an accessible introduction to religion in the United States, this paper has been
produced without footnotes and with few direct quotations from secondary literature. It nevertheless
reflects the influence of a wide range of scholarly arguments. This annotated bibliography presents a
complete list of the texts to which this paper refers, as well as a number of other resources with further

18

information about the topics discussed. Comments following each citation indicate the nature of the text
and, where applicable, the extent of the paper’s reliance upon it.
Books and Articles
Aquinas, Thomas. Summa Theologica, 5 volumes. Christian Classics, 1981.
Augustine. Confessions. Henry Chadwick, trans. Oxford University Press, 1998.
Augustine. The City of God. Modern Library, 1994.
The Bible. Recommended translations are the New American Bible, New American Standard Bible, or
New Revised Standard Version. Some versions offer helpful material in addition to the text; for
example, the Catholic Study Bible (Oxford, 2006) contains extensive reading guides that give
background and context for each book.
Calvin, John. Institutes of Christian Religion. John T. McNeill, ed.; Ford Lewis Battles, trans. Westminster
John Knox, 1960.
Detailed overview of Christianity from its origins to the present.
Chadwick, Henry. The Early Church. Penguin, 1993.
Gonzalez, Justo. The Story of Christianity. Prince Press, 1999; originally published in two volumes by
HarperSanFrancisco, 1984/85.
Overview of the first five centuries of Christian history.
Lynch, Joseph. The Medieval Church: A Brief History. Longman, 1995.
Overview of Christianity during the medieval period.
Corrigan, John, and Winthrop Hudson. Religion in America. Prentice Hall, 2003.
Overview of Christianity in the United States from 1607 to the late twentieth century.
Flannery, Austin, ed. Vatican Council II: Constitutions, Decrees, Declarations. Costello, 1996. [Vatican II
documents also online at http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/index.htm]
Gonzalez, Justo, and Zaida Maldonado Perez. An Introduction to Christian Theology. Abingdon, 2002.
Introduces theology topically (by major doctrines) from a Protestant perspective.
Lewis, C. S. Mere Christianity. HarperSanFrancisco, 2001.
A classic presentation of the “essentials  of Christian faith for non-Christians. Classified as
“apologetics,  meaning that it argues for the reasonableness of Christianity.
Luther, Martin. Martin Luther: Selections from His Writings. John Dillenberger, ed. Anchor, 1958.
McGrath, Alister. Christian Theology: An Introduction. Blackwell, 2001.
Introduces theology topically (by major doctrines) from a Protestant perspective.
Noll, Mark. Turning Points: Decisive Moments in the History of Christianity. Baker Academic, 2000.
Brief overview of Christianity from its origins to the present.
Placher, William. A History of Christian Theology: An Introduction. Westminster John Knox, 1983.
Introduces the development of Christian theology chronologically (as it developed through history)
from a Protestant perspective.
Placher, William, ed. Readings in Christian Theology, Vol. I: From Its Beginnings to the Eve of the Reformation
and Vol. 2: From the Reformation to the Present. Westminster John Knox, 1988.
Rausch, Thomas. The College Student’s Introduction to Theology. Michael Glazier, 1993.
Introduces theology topically (by major doctrines) from a Roman Catholic perspective.
Simons, Menno. Complete Writings. Herald Press, 1956.

19

This project was made possible by a grant from Carnegie Corporation of
New York. The statements made and views expressed are solely the
responsibility of the author.

 id="file23242512" filename="being-a-blessing-to-others" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://biblereasons.com/being-a-blessing-to-others/">
 Why should God let you into Heaven? 
 Being A Blessing To Others 
 Bible verses about being a blessing to others 
 Scripture makes it clear that God blesses us not so we can live with greed, but so we can bless others. God loves a cheerful giver. When He sees that someone is giving freely out of love, God blesses them more. We are blessed to be a blessing. God has given everyone different talents to be used for the benefit of others. 
 There is always an opportunity to bless someone. The more we seek to bless others, God will provide for us and open more doors to accomplish His will. Let’s find out below more ways we can bless others. 
 Quotes 
 “The greatest blessing the whole world is being a blessing.  Jack Hyles 
 “When God blesses you financially, don’t raise your standard of living. Raise your standard of giving.  Mark Batterson 
 “God didn’t add another day to your life because you needed it. He did it because someone out there needs you!  
 “A kind gesture can reach a wound that only compassion can heal.  Steve Maraboli 
 What does the Bible say? 
 1. Proverbs 11:25-26 Whoever brings blessing will be enriched, and one who waters will himself be watered. The people curse him who holds back grain, but a blessing is on the head of him who sells it. 
 2. 2 Corinthians 9:8-11 Besides, God is able to make every blessing of yours overflow for you, so that in every situation you will always have all you need for any good work. As it is written, “He scatters everywhere and gives to the poor; his righteousness lasts forever.  Now he who supplies seed to the farmer and bread to eat will also supply you with seed and multiply it and enlarge the harvest that results from your righteousness. In every way you will grow richer and become even more generous, and this will cause others to give thanks to God because of us, 
 3. Luke 12:48 But someone who does not know, and then does something wrong, will be punished only lightly. When someone has been given much, much will be required in return; and when someone has been entrusted with much, even more will be required. 
 4. 2 Corinthians 9:6 Remember this: The person who sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and the person who sows generously will also reap generously. 
 6. 1 Thessalonians 5:11 So encourage each other to build each other up, just as you are already doing. 
 7. Galatians 6:2 Bear one another’s burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ. 
 8. Romans 15:1 But we who are strong ought to bear with the failings of the weak, and not just please ourselves. 
 Sharing 
 9. Hebrews 13:16 And do not forget to do good and to share with others, for with such sacrifices God is pleased. 
 Spreading the Gospel 
 10. Matthew 28:19 Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. 
 11. Isaiah 52:7 How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of those who bring good news, who proclaim peace, who bring good tidings, who proclaim salvation, who say to Zion, “Your God reigns!  
 Praying for others 
 12. Ephesians 6:18 Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints. 
 13. James 5:16 So confess your sins to one another and pray for one another so that you may be healed. The prayer of a righteous person has great effectiveness. 
 14. 1 Timothy 2:1 I urge you, first of all, to pray for all people. Ask God to help them; intercede on their behalf, and give thanks for them. 
 Correcting someone who is going astray. 
 15. James 5:20 let him know that whoever brings back a sinner from his wandering will save his soul from death and will cover a multitude of sins. 
 16. Galatians 6:1 Brothers, if anyone is caught in any transgression, you who are spiritual should restore him in a spirit of gentleness. Keep watch on yourself, lest you too be tempted. 
 Reminders 
 17. Ephesians 2:10 For we are God’s masterpiece. He has created us anew in Christ Jesus, so we can do the good things he planned for us long ago. 
 18. Matthew 5:16 In the same way, let your light shine before people in such a way that they will see your good actions and glorify your Father in heaven. 
 19. Hebrews 10:24 And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works: 
 21. Matthew 20:28 For even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve others and to give his life as a ransom for many. 
 22. John 10:10 The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy. I came that they may have life and have it abundantly. 
 Examples 
 23. Zechariah 8:18-23 Here is another message that came to me from the Lord of Heaven’s Armies. “This is what the Lord of Heaven’s Armies says: The traditional fasts and times of mourning you have kept in early summer, midsummer, autumn, and winter are now ended. They will become festivals of joy and celebration for the people of Judah. So love truth and peace. “This is what the Lord of Heaven’s Armies says: People from nations and cities around the world will travel to Jerusalem. The people of one city will say to the people of another, ‘Come with us to Jerusalem to ask the Lord to bless us. Let’s worship the Lord of Heaven’s Armies. I’m determined to go. Many peoples and powerful nations will come to Jerusalem to seek the Lord of Heaven’s Armies and to ask for his blessing. “This is what the Lord of Heaven’s Armies says: In those days ten men from different nations and languages of the world will clutch at the sleeve of one Jew. And they will say, ‘Please let us walk with you, for we have heard that God is with you.  
 24. Genesis 12:1-3 The Lord had said to Abram, “Leave your native country, your relatives, and your father’s family, and go to the land that I will show you. I will make you into a great nation. I will bless you and make you famous, and you will be a blessing to others. I will bless those who bless you and curse those who treat you with contempt. All the families on earth will be blessed through you. 
 25. Genesis 18:18-19 “For Abraham will certainly become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth will be blessed through him. I have singled him out so that he will direct his sons and their families to keep the way of the Lord by doing what is right and just. Then I will do for Abraham all that I have promised.  
 You Need This In Your Inbox Today! 
 Signup today and receive encouragement, updates, help, and more straight in your inbox. 

 id="file23242529" filename="being_a_blessing_to_others" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.openbible.info/topics/being_a_blessing_to_others">
 100 Bible Verses about Being A Blessing To Others 
 Matthew 5:16 ESV / 507 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 In the same way, let your light shine before others, so that they may see your good works and give glory to your Father who is in heaven. 
 Do nothing from rivalry or conceit, but in humility count others more significant than yourselves. Let each of you look not only to his own interests, but also to the interests of others. 
 So if there is any encouragement in Christ, any comfort from love, any participation in the Spirit, any affection and sympathy, complete my joy by being of the same mind, having the same love, being in full accord and of one mind. Do nothing from rivalry or conceit, but in humility count others more significant than yourselves. Let each of you look not only to his own interests, but also to the interests of others. Have this mind among yourselves, which is yours in Christ Jesus, ... 
 Luke 6:31 ESV / 217 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 And as you wish that others would do to you, do so to them. 
 And God is able to make all grace abound to you, so that having all sufficiency in all things at all times, you may abound in every good work. As it is written, “He has distributed freely, he has given to the poor; his righteousness endures forever.  He who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will supply and multiply your seed for sowing and increase the harvest of your righteousness. You will be enriched in every way to be generous in every way, which through us will produce thanksgiving to God. 
 Now the Lord said to Abram, “Go from your country and your kindred and your father's house to the land that I will show you. And I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you and make your name great, so that you will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and him who dishonors you I will curse, and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed.  So Abram went, as the Lord had told him, and Lot went with him. Abram was seventy-five years old when he departed from Haran. And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all their possessions that they had gathered, and the people that they had acquired in Haran, and they set out to go to the land of Canaan. When they came to the land of Canaan, ... 
 Ephesians 2:10 ESV / 146 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand, that we should walk in them. 
 Matthew 7:12 ESV / 133 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 “So whatever you wish that others would do to you, do also to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. 
 3 John 1:11 ESV / 129 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Beloved, do not imitate evil but imitate good. Whoever does good is from God; whoever does evil has not seen God. 
 Proverbs 11:25 ESV / 129 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Whoever brings blessing will be enriched, and one who waters will himself be watered. 
 1 Peter 3:9 ESV / 124 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Do not repay evil for evil or reviling for reviling, but on the contrary, bless, for to this you were called, that you may obtain a blessing. 
 James 5:16 ESV / 115 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Therefore, confess your sins to one another and pray for one another, that you may be healed. The prayer of a righteous person has great power as it is working. 
 Romans 8:28 ESV / 114 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 And we know that for those who love God all things work together for good, for those who are called according to his purpose. 
 Hebrews 10:24 ESV / 108 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 And let us consider how to stir up one another to love and good works, 
 Ephesians 1:3 ESV / 108 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places, 
 Matthew 6:1-34 ESV / 102 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 “Beware of practicing your righteousness before other people in order to be seen by them, for then you will have no reward from your Father who is in heaven. “Thus, when you give to the needy, sound no trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may be praised by others. Truly, I say to you, they have received their reward. But when you give to the needy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing, so that your giving may be in secret. And your Father who sees in secret will reward you. “And when you pray, you must not be like the hypocrites. For they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and at the street corners, that they may be seen by others. Truly, I say to you, they have received their reward. ... 
 Hebrews 11:6 ESV / 86 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 And without faith it is impossible to please him, for whoever would draw near to God must believe that he exists and that he rewards those who seek him. 
 Numbers 6:24 ESV / 72 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 The Lord bless you and keep you; 
 1 Peter 3:15 ESV / 65 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 But in your hearts honor Christ the Lord as holy, always being prepared to make a defense to anyone who asks you for a reason for the hope that is in you; yet do it with gentleness and respect, 
 Therefore do not be anxious, saying, ‘What shall we eat?’ or ‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘What shall we wear?’ For the Gentiles seek after all these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them all. But seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things will be added to you. 
 Whoever brings blessing will be enriched, and one who waters will himself be watered. The people curse him who holds back grain, but a blessing is on the head of him who sells it. 
 Genesis 12:1-3 ESV / 53 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Now the Lord said to Abram, “Go from your country and your kindred and your father's house to the land that I will show you. And I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you and make your name great, so that you will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and him who dishonors you I will curse, and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed.  
 John 3:16 ESV / 47 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life. 
 Psalm 40:1-3 ESV / 47 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 To the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. I waited patiently for the Lord; he inclined to me and heard my cry. He drew me up from the pit of destruction, out of the miry bog, and set my feet upon a rock, making my steps secure. He put a new song in my mouth, a song of praise to our God. Many will see and fear, and put their trust in the Lord. 
 Ephesians 5:1 ESV / 42 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Therefore be imitators of God, as beloved children. 
 James 1:5 ESV / 39 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask God, who gives generously to all without reproach, and it will be given him. 
 John 14:13-15 ESV / 39 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Whatever you ask in my name, this I will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If you ask me anything in my name, I will do it. “If you love me, you will keep my commandments. 
 Jeremiah 29:11 ESV / 39 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 For I know the plans I have for you, declares the Lord, plans for welfare and not for evil, to give you a future and a hope. 
 Hebrews 13:16 ESV / 38 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Do not neglect to do good and to share what you have, for such sacrifices are pleasing to God. 
 And I will be a father to you, and you shall be sons and daughters to me, says the Lord Almighty.  
 Matthew 18:20 ESV / 37 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 For where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I among them.  
 1 John 3:2 ESV / 36 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Beloved, we are God's children now, and what we will be has not yet appeared; but we know that when he appears we shall be like him, because we shall see him as he is. 
 Romans 12:13 ESV / 36 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Contribute to the needs of the saints and seek to show hospitality. 
 And my God will supply every need of yours according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus. 
 John 3:1-36 ESV / 35 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Now there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. This man came to Jesus by night and said to him, “Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God, for no one can do these signs that you do unless God is with him.  Jesus answered him, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born again he cannot see the kingdom of God.  Nicodemus said to him, “How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter a second time into his mother's womb and be born?  Jesus answered, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God. ... 
 Blessed are those whose way is blameless, who walk in the law of the Lord! Blessed are those who keep his testimonies, who seek him with their whole heart, who also do no wrong, but walk in his ways! You have commanded your precepts to be kept diligently. Oh that my ways may be steadfast in keeping your statutes! ... 
 1 Timothy 6:11 ESV / 34 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 But as for you, O man of God, flee these things. Pursue righteousness, godliness, faith, love, steadfastness, gentleness. 
 James 1:26 ESV / 33 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 If anyone thinks he is religious and does not bridle his tongue but deceives his heart, this person's religion is worthless. 
 James 1:25 ESV / 33 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 But the one who looks into the perfect law, the law of liberty, and perseveres, being no hearer who forgets but a doer who acts, he will be blessed in his doing. 
 Psalm 119:105 ESV / 33 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path. 
 Psalm 118:1-29 ESV / 33 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Oh give thanks to the Lord, for he is good; for his steadfast love endures forever! Let Israel say, “His steadfast love endures forever.  Let the house of Aaron say, “His steadfast love endures forever.  Let those who fear the Lord say, “His steadfast love endures forever.  Out of my distress I called on the Lord; the Lord answered me and set me free. ... 
 For by grace you have been saved through faith. And this is not your own doing; it is the gift of God, not a result of works, so that no one may boast. 
 Therefore, we are ambassadors for Christ, God making his appeal through us. We implore you on behalf of Christ, be reconciled to God. 
 Ephesians 4:15 ESV / 30 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Rather, speaking the truth in love, we are to grow up in every way into him who is the head, into Christ, 
 Luke 6:38 ESV / 29 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Give, and it will be given to you. Good measure, pressed down, shaken together, running over, will be put into your lap. For with the measure you use it will be measured back to you.  
 And Jesus came and said to them, “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. And behold, I am with you always, to the end of the age.  
 Romans 12:1-3 ESV / 28 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 I appeal to you therefore, brothers, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which is your spiritual worship. Do not be conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewal of your mind, that by testing you may discern what is the will of God, what is good and acceptable and perfect. For by the grace given to me I say to everyone among you not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think with sober judgment, each according to the measure of faith that God has assigned. 
 Zechariah 8:13 ESV / 28 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 And as you have been a byword of cursing among the nations, O house of Judah and house of Israel, so will I save you, and you shall be a blessing. Fear not, but let your hands be strong.  
 James 1:27 ESV / 27 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Religion that is pure and undefiled before God, the Father, is this: to visit orphans and widows in their affliction, and to keep oneself unstained from the world. 
 1 Timothy 3:16 ESV / 27 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Great indeed, we confess, is the mystery of godliness: He was manifested in the flesh, vindicated by the Spirit, seen by angels, proclaimed among the nations, believed on in the world, taken up in glory. 
 Ephesians 4:29 ESV / 26 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Let no corrupting talk come out of your mouths, but only such as is good for building up, as fits the occasion, that it may give grace to those who hear. 
 Ephesians 4:28 ESV / 26 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Let the thief no longer steal, but rather let him labor, doing honest work with his own hands, so that he may have something to share with anyone in need. 
 John 3:16-18 ESV / 26 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life. For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but in order that the world might be saved through him. Whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only Son of God. 
 Ephesians 4:1 ESV / 25 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 I therefore, a prisoner for the Lord, urge you to walk in a manner worthy of the calling to which you have been called, 
 Galatians 6:2 ESV / 25 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Bear one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ. 
 The Spirit and the Bride say, “Come.  And let the one who hears say, “Come.  And let the one who is thirsty come; let the one who desires take the water of life without price. 
 Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen. For by it the people of old received their commendation. By faith we understand that the universe was created by the word of God, so that what is seen was not made out of things that are visible. By faith Abel offered to God a more acceptable sacrifice than Cain, through which he was commended as righteous, God commending him by accepting his gifts. And through his faith, though he died, he still speaks. By faith Enoch was taken up so that he should not see death, and he was not found, because God had taken him. Now before he was taken he was commended as having pleased God. ... 
 “Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. “Blessed are you when others revile you and persecute you and utter all kinds of evil against you falsely on my account. Rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven, for so they persecuted the prophets who were before you. “You are the salt of the earth, but if salt has lost its taste, how shall its saltiness be restored? It is no longer good for anything except to be thrown out and trampled under people's feet. “You are the light of the world. A city set on a hill cannot be hidden. ... 
 Isaiah 44:3 ESV / 24 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 For I will pour water on the thirsty land, and streams on the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit upon your offspring, and my blessing on your descendants. 
 James 1:17 ESV / 23 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights with whom there is no variation or shadow due to change. 
 1 Timothy 4:8 ESV / 23 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 For while bodily training is of some value, godliness is of value in every way, as it holds promise for the present life and also for the life to come. 
 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, To the saints who are in Ephesus, and are faithful in Christ Jesus: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places, even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blameless before him. In love he predestined us for adoption as sons through Jesus Christ, according to the purpose of his will, ... 
 Finally, then, brothers, we ask and urge you in the Lord Jesus, that as you received from us how you ought to walk and to please God, just as you are doing, that you do so more and more. 
 Come to me, all who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you will find rest for your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.  
 Galatians 3:14 ESV / 21 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 So that in Christ Jesus the blessing of Abraham might come to the Gentiles, so that we might receive the promised Spirit through faith. 
 Malachi 3:10 ESV / 21 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Bring the full tithe into the storehouse, that there may be food in my house. And thereby put me to the test, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open the windows of heaven for you and pour down for you a blessing until there is no more need. 
 Jeremiah 32:40 ESV / 21 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 I will make with them an everlasting covenant, that I will not turn away from doing good to them. And I will put the fear of me in their hearts, that they may not turn from me. 
 Psalm 90:17 ESV / 21 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Let the favor of the Lord our God be upon us, and establish the work of our hands upon us; yes, establish the work of our hands! 
 Romans 1:16 ESV / 20 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 For I am not ashamed of the gospel, for it is the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes, to the Jew first and also to the Greek. 
 Luke 18:1-8 ESV / 20 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 And he told them a parable to the effect that they ought always to pray and not lose heart. He said, “In a certain city there was a judge who neither feared God nor respected man. And there was a widow in that city who kept coming to him and saying, ‘Give me justice against my adversary.’ For a while he refused, but afterward he said to himself, ‘Though I neither fear God nor respect man, yet because this widow keeps bothering me, I will give her justice, so that she will not beat me down by her continual coming.’  ... 
 Matthew 6:33 ESV / 20 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 But seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things will be added to you. 
 Psalm 23:1-6 ESV / 20 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 A Psalm of David. The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. He makes me lie down in green pastures. He leads me beside still waters. He restores my soul. He leads me in paths of righteousness for his name's sake. Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for you are with me; your rod and your staff, they comfort me. You prepare a table before me in the presence of my enemies; you anoint my head with oil; my cup overflows. ... 
 Let each of you look not only to his own interests, but also to the interests of others. 
 Romans 5:18 ESV / 19 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Therefore, as one trespass led to condemnation for all men, so one act of righteousness leads to justification and life for all men. 
 Jeremiah 9:24 ESV / 19 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 But let him who boasts boast in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord who practices steadfast love, justice, and righteousness in the earth. For in these things I delight, declares the Lord.  
 For I do not mean that others should be eased and you burdened, but that as a matter of fairness your abundance at the present time should supply their need, so that their abundance may supply your need, that there may be fairness. As it is written, “Whoever gathered much had nothing left over, and whoever gathered little had no lack.  
 Genesis 12:2 ESV / 18 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 And I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you and make your name great, so that you will be a blessing. 
 Then I saw another angel flying directly overhead, with an eternal gospel to proclaim to those who dwell on earth, to every nation and tribe and language and people. 
 1 Peter 5:7 ESV / 17 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Casting all your anxieties on him, because he cares for you. 
 Hebrews 9:22 ESV / 17 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Indeed, under the law almost everything is purified with blood, and without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness of sins. 
 Acts 4:12 ESV / 17 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 And there is salvation in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved.  
 Luke 9:62 ESV / 17 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Jesus said to him, “No one who puts his hand to the plow and looks back is fit for the kingdom of God.  
 James 1:12 ESV / 16 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Blessed is the man who remains steadfast under trial, for when he has stood the test he will receive the crown of life, which God has promised to those who love him. 
 For among them are those who creep into households and capture weak women, burdened with sins and led astray by various passions, always learning and never able to arrive at a knowledge of the truth. Just as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so these men also oppose the truth, men corrupted in mind and disqualified regarding the faith. But they will not get very far, for their folly will be plain to all, as was that of those two men. 
 For God has not called us for impurity, but in holiness. 
 Romans 5:9 ESV / 16 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Since, therefore, we have now been justified by his blood, much more shall we be saved by him from the wrath of God. 
 Acts 20:35 ESV / 16 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 In all things I have shown you that by working hard in this way we must help the weak and remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he himself said, ‘It is more blessed to give than to receive.’  
 Acts 3:26 ESV / 16 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 God, having raised up his servant, sent him to you first, to bless you by turning every one of you from your wickedness.  
 Exodus 16:26 ESV / 16 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Six days you shall gather it, but on the seventh day, which is a Sabbath, there will be none.  
 And God is able to make all grace abound to you, so that having all sufficiency in all things at all times, you may abound in every good work. 
 John 10:10 ESV / 14 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy. I came that they may have life and have it abundantly. 
 First of all, then, I urge that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings be made for all people, for kings and all who are in high positions, that we may lead a peaceful and quiet life, godly and dignified in every way. This is good, and it is pleasing in the sight of God our Savior, who desires all people to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth. For there is one God, and there is one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, ... 
 That I may know him and the power of his resurrection, and may share his sufferings, becoming like him in his death, 
 Acts 11:19-24 ESV / 13 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 Now those who were scattered because of the persecution that arose over Stephen traveled as far as Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antioch, speaking the word to no one except Jews. But there were some of them, men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who on coming to Antioch spoke to the Hellenists also, preaching the Lord Jesus. And the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number who believed turned to the Lord. The report of this came to the ears of the church in Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas to Antioch. When he came and saw the grace of God, he was glad, and he exhorted them all to remain faithful to the Lord with steadfast purpose, ... 
 The Lord bless you and keep you; the Lord make his face to shine upon you and be gracious to you; the Lord lift up his countenance upon you and give you peace. 
 Matthew 5:3-12 ESV / 12 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. “Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted. “Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. “Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. “Blessed are the merciful, for they shall receive mercy. ... 
 Romans 3:24-28 ESV / 11 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 And are justified by his grace as a gift, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God put forward as a propitiation by his blood, to be received by faith. This was to show God's righteousness, because in his divine forbearance he had passed over former sins. It was to show his righteousness at the present time, so that he might be just and the justifier of the one who has faith in Jesus. Then what becomes of our boasting? It is excluded. By what kind of law? By a law of works? No, but by the law of faith. For we hold that one is justified by faith apart from works of the law. 
 John 1:16 ESV / 11 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 And from his fullness we have all received, grace upon grace. 
 Now concerning spiritual gifts, brothers, I do not want you to be uninformed. You know that when you were pagans you were led astray to mute idols, however you were led. Therefore I want you to understand that no one speaking in the Spirit of God ever says “Jesus is accursed!  and no one can say “Jesus is Lord  except in the Holy Spirit. Now there are varieties of gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are varieties of service, but the same Lord; ... 
 John 3:16-17 ESV / 9 helpful votes Helpful Not Helpful 
 “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life. For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but in order that the world might be saved through him. 
 Suggest a Verse 
 Enter a Verse Reference (e.g., John 3:16-17) 
 Visit the Bible online to search for words if you don’t know the specific passage your’re looking for. 

 id="file23242771" filename="Benediction_of_the_Blessed_Sacrament" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://religion.fandom.com/wiki/Benediction_of_the_Blessed_Sacrament">
 Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament begins with the Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament (i.e., consecrated Host) in a monstrance set upon the altar. The liturgy includes singing the ancient Latin hymns written by St Thomas Aquinas, O Salutaris Hostia and Tantum Ergo, followed by the benediction proper. The celebrant holds the monstrance wearing a humeral veil covering his shoulders, arms and hands, and then blesses the faithful with the Blessed Sacrament by tracing the sign of the cross with the monstrance held steadily upright before him. The liturgy concludes with the Divine Praises and Psalm 117 with the antiphon, "Let us forever adore the Most Holy Sacrament." 
 Rite of Benediction 
 Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament 
 The priest or deacon takes the consecrated host out of the tabernacle and places it in the monstrance (which has already been placed on the altar) while the faithful sing O Salutaris Hostia. The faithful kneel at the moment of exposition. 
 Opening Prayer 
 When there is an extended adoration over the course of the day or days, an opening prayer suitable for the occasion collecting and offering the praise and the prayers of the faithful may be offered by the priest or deacon. 
 Adoration 
 Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament is almost always done in silence. Where readings, songs, psalms, devotional prayers (such as the rosary, litany or a novena prayer) or a homily are incorporated, there are still usually lengthy periods of sacred silence for the faithful to be present to Christ in the Eucharist without distraction. Solemn Vespers or Evensong is often sung in the presence of the Blessed Sacrament. 
 Censing 
 Bringing adoration to a close and in preparation for the benediction while all kneel, the priest or deacon censes the exposed host while the faithful sing the Tantum Ergo. This is followed by a versicle and response: 
 V/ Panem de Caelo praestitisti eis. R/ Omne delectamentum in se habentem. 
 or 
 V/ Thou gavest [or You gave] them bread from heaven. R/ Containing within itself all sweetness. 
 Benediction 
 After the incensing the priest prays the Collect of Corpus Christi, then stands and dons the humeral veil, ascends to the altar and lifting the monstrance above his head traces a large cross. 
 Divine Praises 
 Often Divine Praises are said, although this is not a prescribed part of the rite. After the benediction the priest removes the humeral veil and, while kneeling before the Blessed Sacrament, leads the faithful in the recitation or chanting of the Divine Praises. 
 Psalm 
 Psalm 117 is sung with the antiphon "Let us adore forever the most holy sacrament" while the priest returns the Blessed Sacrament to the tabernacle. 
 Adoration outside of Mass 
 The Blessed Sacrament is also adored by Roman Catholics and Anglo-Catholics outside of any liturgical rite. Some have cited reference to St. Basil in the fourth century , but Franciscan archives credit Saint Francis of Assisi (who died in 1226) for starting this devotion in Italy[1]. The lay practice of adoration in France formally began in Avignon in September 1226[2]. The adoration may also be nightly; e.g., the Venerable Leo Dupont initiated nightly adoration of the Blessed Sacrament in Tours in 1849, whence it spread within France[3]. There are religious orders of monks and nuns committed to perpetual adoration of the Blessed Sacrament; some of their number (on a roster) always present in the chapel before the exposed Host. 
 The adoration of the Blessed Sacrament outside of Mass (extra-eucharistic devotion) is attested in numerous Catholic writings and inspirations; e.g., significant portions of the writings of the Venerable Concepcion Cabrera de Armida are reportedly based on her adorations of the Blessed Sacrament [4]. Cabrera de Armida did not represent her writings as interior locutions or visions of Jesus and Mary but as her meditations and inspirations during Eucharistic adoration. 
 Eastern Practice 
 Although the concept of the adoration of the Sacred Mysteries (Blessed Sacrament) outside of the context of Holy Communion is foreign to Eastern Christian (Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic) sacramental theology, veneration takes place during the Divine Liturgy even by those who are not receiving Communion. When the deacon brings the chalice out before the Communion of the Faithful, all either make a full prostration or bow, depending upon the day. A second veneration may be said to take place after Commuion when the priest elevates the chalice before taking it to the Table of Oblation. 
 ↑ Concepción Cabrera de Armida. I Am: Eucharistic Meditations on the Gospel ISBN 0818908904 

 id="file23242768" filename="birth-rites-of-followers-of-the-mormon-religion-12086764.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://classroom.synonym.com/birth-rites-of-followers-of-the-mormon-religion-12086764.html">
 Birth Rites of Followers of the Mormon Religion 
 JASON CRISTIANO RAMON 
 29 SEP 2017 
 The Mormon Doctrine and Covenants states, "Every member of the church of Christ having children is to bring them unto the elders before the church, who are to lay their hands upon them in the name of Jesus Christ and bless them in his name" (The Doctrine and Covenant 20:70). Although Mormon children are not baptized until they are eights years of age (Mormons view this as the age of accountability), all babies are blessed by the church shortly after their birth. 
 Explore this article 
 1 The Role of the Melchizedek Priesthood 
 Only members of the Melchizedek Priesthood, the higher of the two Mormons priesthoods, may perform the blessing rite for the newborn; the member who leads the ceremony is usually the child's father. The priesthood must also receive permission of the presiding authority (often either the church's bishop or ward president) to conduct the blessing. This also means that only men, as the Melchizedek Priesthood excludes women, may take part in the official blessing ceremony. 
 2 Naming Rite 
 The blessing rite does not only welcome newborns, it also acts as an official naming rite for the child, which in turn makes her an official member of the church. Before the blessing and naming rite takes place, the ward's clerk prepares what is referred to as the "child blessing record" and a blessing certificate, which is signed by the church's bishop and is given to the newborn's parents. 
 3 Ceremony 
 During the blessing and naming ceremony, the brethren of the Melchizedek Priesthood surround the baby in a circle and lay their hands under the baby. When performing the blessing, they place their hands onto the child's head. The member leading the ceremony will first address God, state that the blessing is being given by the Melchizedek Priesthood, name the child, give a priesthood blessing and close the ceremony with the name of Jesus Christ. 
 4 The Role of Fasting 
 The blessing rite of a child is usually given during the monthly period of fasting,called Fast Sunday. For Mormons, on a given Sunday once a month, the observance of fasting includes going without food or a drink for two successive meals and attending the "fast and testimony meeting," which is when the blessing of a newborn takes place. 
 About the Author 
 Jason Cristiano Ramon holds a doctorate in political science and a master's degree in philosophy. He has taught political science in China. 
 Regardless of how old we are, we never stop learning. Classroom is the educational resource for people of all ages. Whether you’re studying times tables or applying to college, Classroom has the answers. 

 id="file23242532" filename="bleshme.htm" parent_folder="corpus" url="http://www.thesacredheart.com/bleshme.htm">
 Let us pray. God, who sanctify the places dedicated to Your name, pour out Your grace on this house of prayer, that all who here call on Your name may experience Your kind assistance; through Christ our Lord. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 Let us pray. Lord God almighty, bless this apartment (or home), that it be the shelter of health, purity, and self-control; that there prevail here a spirit of humility, goodness, mildness, obedience to the commandments, and gratitude to God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. May this blessing remain on this place and on those who live here now and always. 
 All: Amen. 
 It is sprinkled with holy water. 
 HOMES - OUTSIDE EASTERTIME 
 A pastor or another priest may wish to sprinkle with holy water a particular home or the homes of the faithful in general. On entering the home he says: 
 P: God's peace be in this home. 
 All: And in all who live here. 
 As he sprinkles the principal room he says: 
 Antiphon: Purify me with hyssop, Lord, and I shall be clean of sin. Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. (Ps. 50.1) Have mercy on me, God, in Your great kindness. 
 V. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 
 All: As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen. 
 P: Ant. Purify me with hyssop, Lord, and I shall be clean of sin. Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. 
 P: Lord, heed my prayer. 
 All: And let my cry be heard by You. 
 P: The Lord be with you. 
 All: May He also be with you. 
 Let us pray. Hear us, holy Lord and Father, almighty everlasting God, and in Your goodness send Your holy angel from heaven to watch over and protect all who live in this home, to be with them and give them comfort and encouragement; through Christ our Lord. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 All: Who made heaven and earth. 
 Let us pray. God the Father almighty, we fervently implore You for the sake of this home and its occupants and possessions, that You may bless and sanctify them, enriching them by Your kindness in every way possible. Pour out on them, Lord, heavenly dew in good measure, as well as an abundance of earthly needs. Mercifully listen to their prayers, and grant that their desires be fulfilled. At our lowly coming be pleased to bless and sanctify this home, as You once were pleased to bless the home of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Within these walls let Your angels of light preside and stand watch over those who live here; through Christ our Lord. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 Let us pray. Lord, bless this bridal chamber, that those who share it may abide in Your peace and conform themselves to Your will. And as they grow older may they know many happy years together, and come finally to Your heavenly kingdom; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 It is sprinkled with holy water. 
 SCHOOL 
 On entering the school the priest sprinkles the rooms with holy water saying: 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 All: Who made heaven and earth. 
 Let us pray. Lord Jesus Christ, who bade Your apostles to pray that peace might come on any house they entered, we entreat You to bless by our ministry this building destined for the education of the young. Bestow Your peace and blessing on it in full measure, so that its teachers and pupils may experience Your saving grace, as did Zaccheus when You came into his home. Bid Your angels to keep guard here and to drive away all power of the enemy. Inspire the teachers with knowledge, wisdom, and holy fear. Foster their pupils with grace from on high, so that they may grasp, retain, and put into practice the lessons they are taught. May teachers and pupils alike so please You by a truly virtuous life that they may finally deserve to be received into Your everlasting home in heaven; through You, Jesus Christ, our Savior and our God, who live and reign forever and ever. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 All: Who made heaven and earth. 
 Let us pray. God, who love truth and justice, pour out Your blessing on this archive constructed to preserve the records of past events and legal documents from destruction by man or time. Let it safely withstand fire and every peril. And let all who come here for research be intent on truth and justice, and grow in their love of You; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 It is sprinkled with holy water. 
 SEMINARY 
 The rector of the seminary, or another priest appointed by the Ordinary to bless new seminary buildings (unless the Ordinary himself wishes to perform the rite), goes at the appointed time to the chapel of the seminary and vests there in surplice and white stole. He is assisted by two clerics, both wearing surplices, one of whom carries the aspersory, the other the Ritual. Kneeling at the altar he intones the "Veni Creator," which is then sung by the seminarians (for the music of this hymn see the music supplement). At the conclusion of the hymn the priest says: 
 P: Send forth Your Spirit and all things shall be recreated. 
 All: And You shall renew the face of the earth. 
 Let us pray. God, who instructed the hearts of the faithful by the light of the Holy Spirit, guide us by Your Spirit to desire only what is good and so always to find joy in His comfort. 
 We beg You, Lord, let a breath of Your grace prompt our undertakings and guide them along their course, so that our least prayer and work may ever begin in You and end in You; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 Then he receives the aspersory from the assistant and intones the Asperges (see The Sunday Blessing with Holy Water). The antiphon is continued by the seminarians (for the music see the music supplement), and is followed by psalm 50; and if time allows by part of psalm 118. 
 Meanwhile the priest, assisted by the cleric who carries the holy water stoup, goes around to all the rooms and other places of the seminary, sprinkling them with holy water in the usual way. 
 He then returns to the chapel and stands before the altar. Glory be to the Father is sung now, even though the psalm may not be finished. After this the priest says: 
 P: Lord, heed my prayer. 
 All: And let my cry be heard by You. 
 P: The Lord be with you. 
 All: May He also be with you. 
 Let us pray. Hear us, holy Lord and Father, almighty everlasting God, and in Your goodness send Your holy angel from heaven to watch over and protect all who live in this seminary, to be with them and give them comfort and encouragement; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 Let us pray. God, who for the glory of Your majesty and the salvation of mankind appointed Your only-begotten Son as the eternal High Priest; grant that those whom You are pleased to select as the ministers and dispensers of Your mysteries may be filled with the spirit of wisdom, knowledge, and holy fear. Help them to put on Christ and to accept their sacred ministry with a pure heart and blameless conduct, and to persevere in it faithful until death. 
 God, who gave the Holy Spirit to the apostles while they were at prayer together with Mary, the Mother of Jesus; grant that, while we are preparing for our future ministry in this holy cenacle, we may render a faithful service to Your majesty under the protection of our Mother, Queen of the apostles, and thus be made ready to extend the glory of Your name by word and by example. 
 God, who made Your Church illustrious by the renowned learning of blessed Thomas, Your confessor, and extended her kingdom by his holy life; help us, we pray, to gain a higher understanding of his teaching and a fuller imitation of his integrity; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 Then the priest takes a crucifix and hangs it in a suitable place, the seminary, one previously selected for this purpose. If the place is some distance from the chapel, the participants may go there in procession, singing the hymn, "Vexilla Regis". 
 As the priest hangs the crucifix in its place he says: 
 Lord, let the sign of our salvation dominate this building, and forbid entrance here to the avenging angel; in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. 
 All: Amen. 
 Then standing before the cross he says: 
 Almighty everlasting God, who are in full command of all places under Your dominion, and without whose leave nothing occurs; shield this seminary from all harm, and let no evil power work havoc here. By the power of the holy cross and by the operation of the Holy Spirit may a worthy service be rendered to You in this place, and may a holy freedom abound; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 Let us pray. Abide with us, O Lord our God, and be a constant help to those who take refuge in Your holy cross; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 Making the sign of the cross with his right hand, the priest blesses the building and all who are present, saying: 
 May the blessing of almighty God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, come on this seminary, on all who live here, teachers and students, and on us all, and remain forever. 
 All: Amen. 
 PRINTING-OFFICE AND PRINTING-PRESS 
 Standing at the entrance the priest says: 
 We beg You, Lord, let a breath of Your grace prompt our undertakings and guide them along their course, so that our least prayer and work may ever begin in You and end in You; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 As he goes into the building he says: 
 P: God's peace be in this establishment. 
 All: And in all who are employed here. 
 Then he says the antiphon "Purify me with hyssop," etc. (see The Sunday Blessing with Holy Water) as he sprinkles with holy water the various rooms of the printing-office, until he comes to the main part. He stops here and says: 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 All: Who made heaven and earth. 
 P: The Lord be with you. 
 All: May He also be with you. 
 Let us pray. Lord Jesus Christ, who said to Your apostles: "In whatever home you enter, greet it, saying, 'Peace be in this home'"; let this same peace, we pray, abide in this printing establishment and in all who transact business here. Be pleased, O Lord, to shield and to free all those who work here from every injury of body and soul. Fill the writers, managers, and employees with the spirit of wisdom, prudence, and strength, and instill in them a holy fear, so that they may faithfully observe the precepts of the Church, and thus use their vocation for Your glory and for the benefit of their fellowmen. Good Jesus, who are the way, the truth, and the life, bless this place, and grant, through the intercession of the glorious and immaculate Virgin Mary, Your Mother, that all who are employed here may happily attain the imperishable crown of glory. We ask this of You who are God, living and reigning forever and ever. 
 All: Amen. 
 Then he blesses the machines and instruments, saying: 
 Let us pray. Lord God, the only source of knowledge, who were pleased so to enlighten men's resourcefulness that they have succeeded in inventing new kinds of printing-presses; put Your blessing, we beg You, on these presses (this press). By Your gracious help may we learn from the books here produced only such wisdom that comes from You and leads to You; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 They are sprinkled with holy water; after which the priest adds: 
 P: The Lord be with you. 
 All: May He also be with you. 
 Let us pray. Hear us, holy Lord and Father, almighty everlasting God, and in Your goodness send Your holy angel from heaven to watch over and protect all who are employed here, to be with them and give them comfort and encouragement; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 If only the printing-office is to be blessed, one omits the second prayer along with the sprinkling of the machines and instruments. But if only the latter are to be blessed, one begins at the versicle "Our help," etc., says the second prayer, and sprinkles the instruments with holy water. 
 HOSPITAL OR SANATORIUM 
 The priest, vested in surplice and white stole, recites the following antiphon and psalm alternately with the bystanders: 
 P: Ant.: Christ cured all the sick. He took on Himself our infirmities and lightened the burden of our illnesses. 
 Psalm 6 
 After the psalm the above antiphon is repeated. Then the priest says: 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 All: Who made heaven and earth. 
 P: The Lord be with you. 
 All: May He also be with you. 
 Let us pray. God, who in a wonderful way created man and still more wonderfully renewed him; who were pleased to aid with many healing remedies the various infirmities that beset the human condition; mercifully pour out Your holy blessing on this hospital, so that the sick who come here may find in You a physician of body and soul, a kind and fatherly helper, and may be taken by You, after the course of this life, to the unending joys of the life to come; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 Let us pray. Lord Jesus Christ, Savior and consoler of our weakness, who delivered Peter's mother-in-law and the ruler's son from a high fever; who restored strength to the paralytic, cleansed the lepers, healed the centurion's servant; who saved the woman suffering from hemorrhage, raised up the man lying helpless on his pallet at the pool of Bethsaida, went about the towns and villages healing all kinds of ailments; we entreat You to bless and sanctify this hospital, so that the sick confined here may be freed from their illness and restored in body and mind, and may rightly see fit to praise Your power until the end of their days; You who live and reign forever and ever. 
 All: Amen. 
 The priest sprinkles with holy water the main parts of the hospital after which he continues: 
 P: Lord, heed my prayer. 
 All: And let my cry be heard by You. 
 Let us pray. Almighty everlasting God, who drive out all sickness of body and soul, manifest Your mighty help to the sick, that by the work of Your mercy they may be restored to their duty of serving You. 
 We entreat You, Lord God, grant us, Your servants, the enjoyment of lasting health of body and mind; and by the glorious intercession of blessed Mary, ever a virgin, free us from present sorrow and give us everlasting joy. 
 God, who by the wondrous ministry of angels guard and govern us, appoint Your angel to stand watch over this hospital and to drive afar all the powers of evil. Let the sick confined here be shielded from fear and anxiety, and let them recover their former good health. 
 God, who in Your wondrous providence chose blessed Joseph as the spouse of Your holy Mother; grant, we pray, that we may deserve to have him for our advocate in heaven whom we venerate as our defender here on earth. 
 God, most merciful Father, who raised up St. Camillus and St. John of God, men imbued with deep compassion, to be comforters and nurses of the sick; by their merits and prayers be pleased to be present with Your healing power to the sick confined here. Free them of bodily ailments and relieve them of mental distress, so that, once restored to their former good health, they may always show You due gratitude for Your loving mercy; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 RADIO STATION 
 From the nearest church or from another place designated for the purpose the priest proceeds to the radio-station, chanting or reciting the Canticle of Zachary or the Canticle of the Three Youths. On arriving at the radio-station he intones the following antiphon and then says psalm 18: 
 P: Ant.: Through all the earth their voice resounds, and to the ends of the world their message. 
 Psalm 18 
 P: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaims His handiwork. 
 All: Day pours out the word to day, and night to night imparts knowledge; 
 P: Not a word nor a discourse whose voice is not heard; 
 All: Through all the earth their voice resounds, and to the ends of the world, their message. 
 P: He has pitched a tent there for the sun, which comes forth like the groom from his bridal chamber and, like a giant, joyfully runs its course. 
 All: At one end of the heavens it comes forth, and its course is to their other end; nothing escapes its heat. 
 P: The law of the Lord is perfect, refreshing the soul; the decree of the Lord is trustworthy, giving wisdom to the simple. 
 All: The precepts of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; the command of the Lord is clear, enlightening the eye; 
 P: The fear of the Lord is pure, enduring forever; the ordinances of the Lord are true, all of them just; 
 All: They are more precious than gold, than a heap of purest gold; sweeter also than syrup or honey from the comb. 
 P: Though Your servant is careful of them, very diligent in keeping them. 
 All: Yet who can detect failings? Cleanse me from my unknown faults! 
 P: From wanton sin especially, restrain Your servant; Let it not rule over me. 
 All: Then shall I be blameless and innocent of serious sin. 
 P: Let the words of my mouth and the thought of my heart find favor before You, O Lord, my rock and my Redeemer. 
 All: Glory be to the Father. 
 P: As it was in the beginning. 
 All: Ant.: Through all the earth their voice resounds, and to the ends of the world their message. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 All: Who made heaven and earth. 
 P: The Lord be with you. 
 Let us pray. God, who ordered all things in creation in a marvelous way, determining even their measure, number, and weight; and who gave man a share in Your knowledge, thus enabling him to detect and control the latent forces with which You endowed the things of the universe; be pleased, we pray, to bless these instruments made for transmitting wavelengths of sound through the air, spreading out in all directions as instantaneously as lightning. Let them carry messages of aid in times of crises, of solace in times of distress, of advice in times of doubt, of light in times of darkness, and thus make known the glory of Your name more widely throughout the world that all its peoples may be gathered into the fellowship of Your love; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 Let us pray. Almighty everlasting God, who created the world by Your Word, and decreed that all things be brought to a head in Him who was made flesh and who suffered for us; graciously grant that His Gospel may be preached to every creature on the wavelengths of sound, so that, aided by the prayers of the blessed Mary, Mother of God and ever a Virgin, and of St. Gabriel the Archangel, messenger of the heavenly mysteries, all peoples may be united in the body of Christ and be gladdened with the gift of His peace; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 The radio-station is sprinkled with holy water. And after the blessing the "Te Deum" is sung or recited, together with its versicles and oration (see Renewal of the Marriage Vows). 
 SEA 
 The priest intones the following antiphon, which is then followed by psalm 28: 
 P: Ant.: The voice of the Lord is over the waters, the God of glory thunders, the Lord, over vast waters. 
 Psalm 28 
 After the psalm the above antiphon is repeated. Then the priest continues: 
 Lord, have mercy. Christ, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Our Father (the rest inaudibly until:) 
 Let us pray. Almighty everlasting God, Father of incomprehensible majesty, whose invisible power can be glimpsed from Your visible creation; O God, whose Spirit hovered over the waters in the beginning of the world, grant to us, Your servants, that as often as we behold with our bodily eyes the mighty waters swelling out in billows on the heavenly horizon, we may be enraptured in contemplation of Your hidden mysteries. Let such a sight and the thoughts it arouses prompt us to invoke and to glorify with due praise Your holy name, and to render to You, to whose empire all creatures are subject, the homage of our minds in true humility and devotion; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 Let us pray. Lord Jesus Christ, who once walked upon the waters, who uttered a word of command to the raging tempest of wind and sea and there came a great calm; let Your piteous glance fall on us, Your servants, who find ourselves surrounded by the many perils of this life; and grant that by the power of Your blessing poured out on these waters all wicked spirits may be repelled, the danger of the tempestuous winds may subside, and that all who are at voyage on the seas, through the intercession of the Immaculate Virgin, Your Mother, may safely reach their destination, and finally return unharmed to their homes. We ask this of You who live and reign forever and ever. 
 All: Amen. 
 Let us pray. Lord, who said: "In the sweat of your brow you shall eat your bread"; kindly heed our prayers and bestow Your blessing on this sea, so that all who are obliged to earn their daily bread for themselves and their families by traversing these waters may be enriched with Your bounty and offer You due gratitude for Your goodness; through Christ our Lord. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 Let us pray. God, from whom every good has its beginning and from whom it receives its increase, we beg You to hear our prayers, so that what we begin for Your honor and glory may be brought to a happy ending by the gift of Your eternal wisdom; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 Let us pray. Almighty everlasting God, who conferred on Your priests above all others so great a grace, that whatever they do worthily and exactly in Your name, is regarded as being done by You; we pray that in Your kindness You may be present wherever we are present and may bless Yourwhatever we bless. And at our lowly coming, through the merits and prayers of Your saints, may demons flee and the angel of peace be at hand; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 Now the Litany of the Saints is said; all kneel during the litany. After the following invocation has been said: That You deliver our souls and the souls of our brethren, relatives, and benefactors from everlasting damnation, etc., the priest rises and says: 
 P: That You bless these fields (or acres, or these mountain-meadows, or pastures, or meadows). 
 All: We beg You to hear us. 
 P: That You bless and consecrate these fields (or acres, or these mountain-meadows, or pastures, or meadows). 
 All: We beg You to hear us. 
 P: That You bless and consecrate and protect from diabolical destruction these fields (or acres, or these mountain-meadows, or pastures, or meadows). 
 All: We beg You to hear us. 
 P: That You mercifully ward off and dispel from this place all lightning, hail-storm, destructive tempests, and harmful floods. 
 All: We beg You to hear us. 
 Then the litany is resumed to the end; after which the priest says Our Father (the rest inaudibly until:) 
 P: And lead us not into temptation. 
 All: But deliver us from evil. 
 P: Send forth Your Spirit and all things shall be recreated. 
 P: Lord, heed my prayer. 
 Let us pray. Almighty God, we humbly appeal to Your kindness, asking that You pour out the dew of Your blessing on these fields (or acres, or mountain-meadows, or pastures, or meadows), which it has pleased You to nurture with favorable weather. Grant to Your people a spirit of constant gratitude for Your gifts. Wipe out any infertility from this land, thus filling the hungry with an abundance of good things, so that the poor and the needy may praise Your wondrous name forever and ever. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 Let us pray. Almighty God, we appeal to Your kindness, asking that You pour out the dew of Your blessing on these budding creatures of yours, which it has pleased You to nurture with rain and mild breezes, and that You bring the fruits of Your earth to a ripe harvest. Grant to Your people a spirit of constant gratitude for Your gifts. And from a fertile earth all the hungry with an abundance of good things, so that the poor and needy may praise Your wondrous name forever and ever. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 Let us pray. Lord God almighty, who never fail to bestow on men an abundance of heavenly gifts, as well as the rich fruits of the earth; we give thanks to You in Your glory for this harvest of grain, and beg You again to bless the harvest which we have received from Your bounty, to preserve it and to shield it from harm. Grant also that, having had our desire for earthly needs filled, we may bask under Your protection, praise Your kindness and mercy without ceasing, and make use of temporal goods in such a way as not to lose everlasting goods; through Christ our Lord. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 Let us pray. Almighty everlasting God, who in punishment for sin declared to man: "In the sweat of your brow you shall eat your bread"; bestow Your blessing on this mill which has been built to produce flour, and thus supply bread for our nourishment. May it please You to appoint Your angel of light to stand watch over it; through Christ our Lord. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 Let us pray. Lord God almighty, who willed that Your only-begotten Son, our Redeemer, be born in a stable, and lie in a manger between two beasts of burden; we beg You to bless this stable and to defend it from all spite and wickedness of the devil. Let it be a healthful shelter for horses, cattle, and other animals, safe from every kind of assault. And as the ox knows his master and the ass the manger of his Lord, so grant that Your servants, made in Your image and only a little lower than the angels, to whom You have subjected all sheep and oxen and cattle of the fields, may not be like senseless beasts, like the horse or the mule who are without understanding. But let them acknowledge You alone as God and the source of all good. Let them faithfully persevere in Your service, show You gratitude for favors received, and thus merit greater benefits in future; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 The stable and animals are sprinkled with holy water. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 All: Who made heaven and earth. 
 P: The Lord be with you. 
 Let us pray. Lord, we humbly appeal to Your kindness, asking that You sanctify this fountain of water with a blessing from on high, thus making it a wholesome water for our daily use. May it please You to keep it pure and free of every diabolical defilement, so that all who draw water from it or drink of it may delight in its strengthening and health-giving quality, and give thanks to You, the Lord and Savior of all; through Christ our Lord. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 Let us pray. Lord God almighty, who so disposed matters that water comes forth from the depths of this well by means of its pipes; grant, we pray, that with Your help and by this blessing imparted through our ministry all diabolical wiles and cunning may be dispelled, and the water of this well may always remain pure and wholesome; through Christ our Lord. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 Let us pray. Lord, heed our prayers, and be pleased to bless this bridge and all who pass over it, that they may ever find in You a safeguard amidst the joys and sorrows of this fickle world; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 Let us pray. Hear us, holy Lord and Father, almighty everlasting God, and in Your goodness send Your holy angel from heaven to watch over, protect, and support this bridge and all who pass over it; through Christ our Lord. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 Let us pray. Almighty everlasting God, to whom all creatures owe their origin and are made subject to man's use by an admirable arrangement of Your kindness; who in times past prescribed that Your altar be made of stones and smoothly joined together with lime, so that the words of Deuteronomy could be inscribed thereon as a reminder of Your commandments; we humbly beg You to bless this lime-kiln, and to dispel from it all harmful tricks of the devil. Let it be productive and serve its purpose well, with its fires exerting their full force, so that the workmen may receive by Your bounty a good quality of lime. And let them in turn likewise receive an increase of Your saving grace; through Christ our Lord. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 Let us pray. Almighty everlasting God, to whom all creatures owe their origin and are made subject to man's use by an admirable arrangement of Your kindness; who in one moment shielded the three youths in the fiery furnace by mitigating the heat of its flames, and in another moment again enkindled them to destroy those evil men who had cast the saintly youths therein; we humbly beg You to bless this furnace, and to dispel from it all harmful tricks of the devil. Let it be productive and serve its purpose well, with its fires exerting their full force, so that the workmen may receive a good quality of metal (or a goodly number of brick). And let them in turn likewise receive an increase of Your saving grace; through Christ our Lord. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 Let us pray. Almighty everlasting God, the Creator and dispenser of all good things, who for our use planted innumerable riches in the bowels of the earth, to be dug out by the industry of man; be pleased, we pray, to pour out Your blessing on these stone-quarries, so that they may not be ruined, and that all who work in them may be safeguarded from accidents; through Christ our Lord. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 All: Who made heaven and earth. 
 Let us pray. Lord God almighty, who by the coming of Your only begotten Son sanctified all things for Your faithful, we beg You to bless and prosper this marble-factory, and to protect Your servants who work here from every kind of adversity. Grant also that they may so pursue their work as to have it be a means of their salvation, meriting to be living and chosen stones in the everlasting dwelling of Your majesty; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 It is sprinkled with holy water. 
 WARD OFF FLOODS 
 The priest, vested in surplice and stole, accompanied by the people, carries a relic of the True Cross to the river or stream, and there devoutly reads at each of four different spots one of the introductions to the four Gospels. After each Gospel he adds the following verses and prayers: 
 All: And deliver us for Your name's sake. 
 P: Save Your servants. 
 All: Who trust in You, my God. 
 P: Lord, heed my prayer. 
 All: And let my cry be heard by You. 
 Let us pray. God, who give saving grace even to the wicked land who do not will the death of the sinner, we humbly appeal to You in glory, asking that You protect with Your heavenly aid Your trusting servants from all perils of flood. Let them find in You a constant safeguard, so that they may always serve You and never be separated from You through any temptation; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 And may the blessing of almighty God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, come upon these waters and keep them always under control. 

 id="file23242546" filename="bless" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.etymonline.com/word/bless">
 bless (v.) 
 Old English bletsian, bledsian, Northumbrian bloedsian "to consecrate by a religious rite, make holy, give thanks," from Proto-Germanic *blodison "hallow with blood, mark with blood," from *blotham "blood" (see blood (n.)). Originally a blood sprinkling on pagan altars. 
 This word was chosen in Old English bibles to translate Latin benedicere and Greek eulogein, both of which have a ground sense of "to speak well of, to praise," but were used in Scripture to translate Hebrew brk "to bend (the knee), worship, praise, invoke blessings." L.R. Palmer ("The Latin Language") writes, "There is nothing surprising in the semantic development of a word denoting originally a special ritual act into the more generalized meanings to 'sacrifice,' 'worship,' 'bless,' " and he compares Latin immolare (see immolate). 
 The meaning shifted in late Old English toward "pronounce or make happy, prosperous, or fortunate" by resemblance to unrelated bliss. Meaning "invoke or pronounce God's blessing upon" is from early 14c. No cognates in other languages. Related: Blessed; blessing. 
 Entries linking to bless 
 Old English blod "blood, fluid which circulates in the arteries and veins," from Proto-Germanic *blodam "blood" (source also of Old Frisian blod, Old Saxon blôd, Old Norse bloð, Middle Dutch bloet, Dutch bloed, Old High German bluot, German Blut, Gothic bloþ), according to some sources from PIE *bhlo-to-, perhaps meaning "to swell, gush, spurt," or "that which bursts out" (compare Gothic bloþ "blood," bloma "flower"), from suffixed form of root *bhel- (3) "to thrive, bloom." But Boutkan finds no certain IE etymology and assumes a non-IE origin. 
 There seems to have been an avoidance in Germanic, perhaps from taboo, of other PIE words for "blood," such as *esen- (source of poetic Greek ear, Old Latin aser, Sanskrit asrk, Hittite eshar); also *krew-, which seems to have had a sense of "blood outside the body, gore from a wound" (source of Latin cruour "blood from a wound," Greek kreas "meat"), but which came to mean simply "blood" in the Balto-Slavic group and some other languages. 
 Inheritance and relationship senses (also found in Latin sanguis, Greek haima) emerged in English by mid-13c. Meanings "person of one's family, race, kindred; offspring, one who inherits the blood of another" are late 14c. As the fluid of life (and the presumed seat of the passions), blood has stood for "temper of mind, natural disposition" since c. 1300 and been given many figurative extensions. Slang meaning "hot spark, a man of fire" [Johnson] is from 1560s. Blood pressure attested from 1862. Blood money is from 1530s; originally money paid for causing the death of another. 
 Blood type is from 1928. That there were different types of human blood was discovered c. 1900 during early experiments in transfusion. To get blood from a stone "do the impossible" is from 1660s. Expression blood is thicker than water attested by 1803, in reference to family ties of those separated by distance. New (or fresh) blood, in reference to new members of an organization or group, especially ones bringing new ideas and fresh vigor or strength, is from 1880. 
 1540s, "to sacrifice, kill as a victim," from Latin immolatus, past participle of immolare "to sacrifice," originally "to sprinkle with sacrificial meal," from assimilated form of in- "into, in, on, upon" (from PIE root *en "in") + mola (salsa) "(sacrificial) meal," related to molere "to grind" (from PIE root *mele- "to crush, grind"). Related: Immolated; immolating. 
 Others are reading 
 Share bless 
 ‘cite’ 
 Page URL: 
 https://www.etymonline.com/word/bless 
 HTML Link: 
 <a href="https://www.etymonline.com/word/bless">Etymology of bless by etymonline</a> 
 APA style: 
 Harper, D. (n.d.). Etymology of bless. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved $(datetime), from https://www.etymonline.com/word/bless 
 Chicago style: 
 Harper Douglas, “Etymology of bless,  Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed $(datetime), https://www.etymonline.com/word/bless. 
 MLA style: 
 Harper, Douglas. “Etymology of bless.  Online Etymology Dictionary, https://www.etymonline.com/word/bless. Accessed $(datetimeMla). 
 IEEE style: 
 D. Harper. “Etymology of bless.  Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/word/bless (accessed $(datetime)). 
 make the sign of the cross over someone in order to call on God for protection; consecrate; 

 id="file23242578" filename="bless" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.dictionary.com/browse/bless">
 to consecrate or sanctify by a religious rite; make or pronounce holy. 
 to request of God the bestowal of divine favor on: Bless this house. 
 to bestow good of any kind upon: a nation blessed with peace. 
 to extol as holy; glorify: Bless the name of the Lord. 
 to protect or guard from evil (usually used as an interjection): Bless you! Bless your innocent little heart! 
 to condemn or curse: I'll be blessed if I can see your reasoning. Bless me if it isn't my old friend! 
 to make the sign of the cross over or upon: The Pope blessed the multitude. 
 SEE MORESEE LESS 
 OTHER WORDS FOR bless 
 In effect, this quiz will prove whether or not you have the skills to know the difference between “affect  and “effect.  
 Question 1 of 7 
 The rainy weather could not ________ my elated spirits on my graduation day. 
 Origin of bless 
 First recorded before 950; Middle English blessen, Old English blētsian, blēdsian “to consecrate  (originally done with blood), earlier *blōdisōian (blōd “blood  + -isō- derivational suffix + -ian verb suffix); see blood 
 OTHER WORDS FROM bless 
 blesser, nounbless·ing·ly, adverboutbless, verb (used with object), out·blessed or out·blest, out·bles·sing.pre·bless, verb (used with object) 
 Words related to bless 
 How to use bless in a sentence 
 We’re blessed to live in countries where we can be who we are and yet we know that there are individual cases around the world, individual countries that deny just basic human rights. 
 It’s like, songs like that makes me realize how I’ve been a wretch, and yet God will bless me. 
 That’s when a country seemingly blessed with valuable natural resources ultimately suffers because it fails to diversify their economy. 
 I was blessed enough to get this opportunity at a very young age, but I’ve taken every opportunity that’s come my way. 
 In 1923, San Diego adopted its first zoning ordinance – six years after the Supreme Court outlawed racial districts, and three years before the court blessed the basic structure of zoning we know today. 
 The ceremony ended with a singing of “God Bless America,  with some of those in the stands as well as de Blasio singing along. 
 I think Richard Kiel did, God bless him, but according to Rob, there was really only one person who could play the role. 
 "God bless 'ee, Missy," cried the old man in the shrill cracked voice of age, as he pressed up to the carriage window. 
 Gilbert's "O shame, father," and Mrs. Rushmere's "God bless the dear child," following her hasty retreat. 
 “God bless thee, little David,  said the country folk, crowding to shake his hand as he was conveyed back to London for his trial. 
 Put your hands together as you do when you’re saying your prayers, mon brave, and say, ‘God bless father and mother. 
 I have earnestly prayed that what I am about to say may bear fruit and I know that you will bless my word with a similar prayer. 
 British Dictionary definitions for bless 
 bless 
 / (blɛs) / 
 verb blesses, blessing, blessed or blest (tr) 
 to consecrate or render holy, beneficial, or prosperous by means of a religious rite 
 to give honour or glory to (a person or thing) as divine or holy 
 to call upon God to protect; give a benediction to 
 to worship or adore (God); call or hold holy 
 (often passive) to grant happiness, health, or prosperity tothey were blessed with perfect peace 
 (usually passive) to endow with a talent, beauty, etcshe was blessed with an even temper 
 rare to protect against evil or harm 
 bless! (interjection) an exclamation of well-wishing 
 bless you! (interjection) 
 a traditional phrase said to a person who has just sneezed 
 an exclamation of well-wishing or surprise 
 bless me!, bless my soul! or God bless my soul! (interjection) an exclamation of surprise 
 not have a penny to bless oneself with to be desperately poor 
 SEE MORESEE LESS 
 Word Origin for bless 
 Old English blǣdsian to sprinkle with sacrificial blood; related to blōd blood 

 id="file23242580" filename="bless" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/bless">
 bless 
 Definition of bless 
 1 religion : to hallow or consecrate by religious rite or word asked the priest to bless their marriage Bless this home. 
 2 religion : to hallow with the sign of the cross He blessed himself before liftoff. 
 3 : to invoke divine care for bless your heart —used in the phrase bless you to wish good health especially to one who has just sneezed 
 5 : to confer prosperity or happiness upon God has blessed us with four children. 
 6 archaic : protect, preserve Bless me from marrying a usurer!— Shakespeare 
 Synonyms & Antonyms for bless 
 Examples of bless in a Sentence 
 The priest blessed their marriage at the wedding. The water for the baptism has been blessed. The priest blessed the baby I held in my arms. 
 See More 
 Recent Examples on the Web And my God, bless those who stand watch over democracy. — Ayushi Agarwal, ABC News, 6 Jan. 2022 Stanford, god bless him, gave us huge, huggable, homosexual florals. — Raven Smith, Vogue, 6 Jan. 2022 God bless the ancient Wichitas, rising like bare knuckles from the dirt. — Washington Post, 9 Dec. 2021 God bless us, everyone—to each according to his need, from each according to his ability. — Natalie Shure, The New Republic, 20 Dec. 2021 Live theater is back, and in the words of Tiny Tim, god bless us everyone. — Maureen Lee Lenker, EW.com, 2 Dec. 2021 God Bless you, and may God continue to bless the United States of America. — Melissa Quinn, CBS News, 25 Aug. 2020 The Rockets, God bless their souls, can’t seem to help themselves. — Duane Rankin, The Arizona Republic, 14 Nov. 2021 And God bless you, Stephen King, for telling the world that. — Matt Wake | Mwake@al.com, al, 19 Oct. 2021 
 These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'bless.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback. 
 See More 
 First Known Use of bless 
 before the 12th century, in the meaning defined at sense 1 
 History and Etymology for bless 
 Middle English, from Old English blētsian, from blōd blood; from the use of blood in consecration 
 Kids Definition of bless 
 1 : to make holy by a religious ceremony or words bless an altar 
 2 : to ask the favor or protection of God for Bless the children of the world. 
 Hint: The phrase bless you is used to wish good health especially to someone who has just sneezed. 
 3 : to praise or honor as holy bless the Lord 
 4 : to give happiness or good fortune to He is blessed with good health. 
 Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions and advanced search—ad free! 

 id="file23242628" filename="bless" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.vocabulary.com/dictionary/bless">
 Look up a word, learn it forever. 
 bless 
 To bless is to offer a holy seal of approval, like when a priest blesses water, making holy water. It’s also what people say when you sneeze: bless you, which is short for “may God bless you.  
 If you go back far enough, the word bless is related to the word blood, because of the blood sprinkled on pagan alters. It moved on to mean “to praise,  and now it’s a little of both (minus the pagans). In religious contexts, things are made holy when they're blessed. Also, people are blessed by good things that happen. People often say things like "I've been blessed with good health.  That means they were lucky to receive such good things. 
 Definitions of bless 
 verb 
 make the sign of the cross over someone in order to call on God for protection; consecrate 
 SAT/PSAT 
 TOEFL 
 Sign up now (it’s free!) 
 Whether you’re a teacher or a learner, Vocabulary.com can put you or your class on the path to systematic vocabulary improvement. 

 id="file23242637" filename="bless" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.definitions.net/definition/bless">
 Here are all the possible meanings and translations of the word bless. 
 make the sign of the cross over someone in order to call on God for protection; consecrate 
 to make happy, blithesome, or joyous; to confer prosperity or happiness upon; to grant divine favor to 
 Blessverb 
 to express a wish or prayer for the happiness of; to invoke a blessing upon; -- applied to persons 
 Blessverb 
 to invoke or confer beneficial attributes or qualities upon; to invoke or confer a blessing on, -- as on food 
 Blessverb 
 to make the sign of the cross upon; to cross (one's self) 
 Chambers 20th Century Dictionary(1.00 / 3 votes)Rate this definition: 
 Bless 
 bles, v.t. to invoke a blessing upon: to make joyous, happy, or prosperous: to consecrate by some religious rite, to cross one's self: to extol as holy, to pronounce happy, to invoke the divine favour upon: to wish happiness to: to praise or glorify:—pa.p. blessed (blest), or blest.—adj. Bless′ed, happy: prosperous: happy in heaven, beatified.—adv. Bless′edly.—ns. Bless′edness; Bless′ing, a wish or prayer for happiness or success: any means or cause of happiness: (B.) a gift or present: a form of invoking the favour of God at a meal.—adv. Bless′ingly.—Single blessedness, the celibate life, the unmarried state generally. [A.S. blétsian, to bless, prob. from blót, sacrifice; the word taken as—benedicĕre.] 
 Song lyrics by bless -- Explore a large variety of song lyrics performed by bless on the Lyrics.com website. 
 Examples of bless in a Sentence 
 I don't know if I want to cry, smile, what, I'm just grateful for this moment. I'm thankful that I can bless my kids with something that I didn't have. 
 Listen close and you can hear, “Please, bless us and forgive us, and make us good here and strong here. Let us get along here. Let those we love and left behind be blessed. Let us find the proper path and keep to it. Help us act harmoniously, and find work pleasing in the sight of god and man.  
 God bless you, Ruth Bader Ginsburg.I am not Ruth Bader Ginsburg.I but these were the first words that came to mind when I heard this very sad news. A titan. A beacon. A giant. What a loss. And she fought so hard for so long. Bless her. 
 God is never in a haste to bless you or anyone. Yes, because it doesn't and it won't take him much time to bless you or anyone else. I mean, he (God) can bless you overnight. 
 Then Bob proposed 'A Merry Christmas to us all, my dears. God bless us' Which all his family re-echoed. 'God bless us every one' said Tiny Tim, the last of all. 
 Word of the Day 
 Would you like us to send you a FREE new word definition delivered to your inbox daily? 
 0 Comments 
 Notify me of new comments via email. 
 Publish 
 ×Close 
 Report Comment 
 We're doing our best to make sure our content is useful, accurate and safe. If by any chance you spot an inappropriate comment while navigating through our website please use this form to let us know, and we'll take care of it shortly. 
 Use the citation below to add this definition to your bibliography: 
 Are we missing a good definition for bless? Don't keep it to yourself... 
 Submit Definition 
 Close 
 ×Close 
 Note 
 The ASL fingerspelling provided here is most commonly used for proper names of people and places; it is also used in some languages for concepts for which no sign is available at that moment. 
 There are obviously specific signs for many words available in sign language that are more appropriate for daily usage. 
 Close 
 ×Close 
 Report Image 
 We're doing our best to make sure our content is useful, accurate and safe. If by any chance you spot an inappropriate image within your search results please use this form to let us know, and we'll take care of it shortly. 

 id="file23242708" filename="bless" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.thefreedictionary.com/bless">
 bless 
 bless 
 (blĕs) 
 tr.v. blessed or blest (blĕst), bless·ing, bless·es 
 1. To make holy by religious rite; sanctify: The clergy blessed the site for the new monastery. 
 2. To invoke divine favor upon: The bishop blessed the fishing fleet. 
 3. To make the sign of the cross over: She knelt and blessed herself. 
 4. To honor as holy; glorify: Bless the Lord. 
 5. To confer well-being or prosperity on: They were blessed with a baby girl. 
 6. To endow, as with talent: He was blessed with a photographic memory. 
 Idiom: 
 bless you 
 Used to wish good health to a person who has just sneezed. 
 [Middle English blessen, from Old English blētsian, to consecrate; see bhel- in Indo-European roots.] 
 bless′er n. 
 Word History: The verb bless comes from Old English blœ̄dsian, blēdsian, blētsian, "to bless, wish happiness, consecrate." Although the Old English verb has no cognates in any other Germanic language, it can be shown to derive from the Germanic noun *blōdan, "blood." Blœ̄dsian therefore originally meant "to consecrate with blood, sprinkle with blood." In many cultures, the blood of a sacrificed animal is thought to hallow and bring blessings upon the people and places that it touches. In the Biblical book of Exodus, for example, God punishes the Egyptians by killing the first-born son in every family, but the Israelites are able to protect their own houses from divine wrath by sprinkling the blood of a sacrificed lamb on their lintels and doorposts. The Angles, Saxons, and Jutes, the early Germanic migrants to Britain, would have originally used the verb blœ̄dsian for the consecrations effected by their own pagan sacrifices. After they converted to Christianity, however, blœ̄dsian acquired new meanings when it was used to translate the verb benedīcere, "to bless" in the Latin Bible. 
 bless 
 (blɛs) 
 vb (tr) , blesses, blessing, blessed or blest 
 1. (Ecclesiastical Terms) to consecrate or render holy, beneficial, or prosperous by means of a religious rite 
 2. (Ecclesiastical Terms) to give honour or glory to (a person or thing) as divine or holy 
 3. to call upon God to protect; give a benediction to 
 4. (Ecclesiastical Terms) to worship or adore (God); call or hold holy 
 5. (often passive) to grant happiness, health, or prosperity to: they were blessed with perfect peace. 
 6. (usually passive) to endow with a talent, beauty, etc: she was blessed with an even temper. 
 7. rare to protect against evil or harm 
 8. bless! (interjection) an exclamation of well-wishing 
 9. bless you! (interjection) 
 a. a traditional phrase said to a person who has just sneezed 
 b. an exclamation of well-wishing or surprise 
 10. bless me! bless my soul! God bless my soul! (interjection) an exclamation of surprise 
 11. not have a penny to bless oneself with to be desperately poor 
 [Old English blǣdsian to sprinkle with sacrificial blood; related to blōd blood] 
 bless - give a benediction to; "The dying man blessed his son" 
 anele, embrocate, inunct, oil, anoint - administer an oil or ointment to ; often in a religious ceremony of blessing 
 bestow, confer - present; "The university conferred a degree on its most famous former student, who never graduated"; "bestow an honor on someone" 
 3. 
 bless - make the sign of the cross over someone in order to call on God for protection; consecrate 
 gesticulate, gesture, motion - show, express or direct through movement; "He gestured his desire to leave" 
 reconsecrate - consecrate anew, as after a desecration 
 declare - state emphatically and authoritatively; "He declared that he needed more money to carry out the task he was charged with" 
 bless 
 [bles] VT 
 1. [God, priest] → bendecir God bless you! → ¡Dios te bendiga! God bless the Pope! → ¡Dios guarde al Papa! bless you! → ¡qué cielo eres!; (after sneezing) → ¡Jesús! and Paul, bless him or bless his heart, had no idea that → y Paul, el pobre, no tenía ni idea de que ... to bless o.s → santiguarse 
 2. (fig) they were never blessed with children → Dios jamás les dio la bendición de los hijos she is blessed with every virtue → la adornan mil virtudes I bless the day I bought it → bendigo el día que lo compré well I'm blessed!; God bless my soul! (o.f.) → ¡vaya por Dios! I'm blessed if I know (Brit) → no tengo ni idea 
 bless 
 to be blessed with [person] → être doué(e) de She is blessed with immense talent → Elle est douée d'un immense talent. to be blessed with a perfect climate [island, area] → jouir d'un climat parfait 
 bless 
 vt 
 (God, priest) → segnen; God bless (you) → behüt dich/euch Gott; God bless America → Gott schütze Amerika; bless you, my son → Gott segne dich, mein Sohn; did you buy that for me, bless you? (inf) → hast du das für mich gekauft? das ist aber lieb von dir! (inf); bless you, darling, you’re an angel (inf) → du bist wirklich lieb, du bist ein Engel (inf); bless your little cotton socks (inf) → du bist ja ein Schatz (inf); bless you! (to sneezer) → Gesundheit!; bless me! (inf) bless my soul! (inf) → du meine Güte! (inf); he’s lost it again, bless him (iro) → prima, er hat es wieder mal verloren! (iro); I’ll be blessed or blest if I’m going to do that! (inf) → das fällt mir ja nicht im Traum ein! (inf); well, I’ll be blessed! (inf) → so was! 
 to bless somebody with something → jdn mit etw segnen; to be blessed with → gesegnet sein mit 
 "Bless my ham sandwich, but they'll need plenty of some sort of refreshment," said Mr. 
 They arranged a reception-room for men, and a place was railed in so that he should not be pushed over by the crowds of women visitors, and so that he could conveniently bless those who came. 
 When the deacon had finished the prayer for the Imperial family, the priest turned to the bridal pair with a book: "Eternal God, that joinest together in love them that were separate," he read in a gentle, piping voice: "who hast ordained the union of holy wedlock that cannot be set asunder, Thou who didst bless Isaac and Rebecca and their descendants, according to Thy Holy Covenant; bless Thy servants, Konstantin and Ekaterina, leading them in the path of all good works. 
 In the hour of my death, I shall hold sacred the one good remembrance-- and shall thank and bless you for it--that my last avowal of myself was made to you, and that my name, and faults, and miseries were gently carried in your heart. 
 Captain Jim thought women were delightful creatures, who ought to have the vote, and everything else they wanted, bless their hearts; but he did not believe they could write. 
 Her own future was close-folded still; folded and hidden in beautiful mists; but she leaned her head against the sun-warmed door, and closing her eyes, whispered, just as if she had been a child saying her prayers: "God bless aunt Miranda; God bless the brick house that was; God bless the brick house that is to be!" 
 he hath preserved me and my little family; we have all reason to bless him while we live.--And I pray Heaven to bless him, and turn the hearts of his malicious enemies. 
 'Lor bless her dear heart, no!' interposed the nurse, hastily depositing in her pocket a green glass bottle, the contents of which she had been tasting in a corner with evident satisfaction. 
 And you yourselves would I bless, ye twinkling starlets and glow-worms aloft!--and would rejoice in the gifts of your light. 
 "So I come, master, and the people say to me: 'A great blessing has been revealed, holy oil trickles from the cheeks of our blessed Mother, the Holy Virgin Mother of God'...." 
 Through you, O queen, men are blessed in their children and blessed in their harvests, and to you it belongs to give means of life to mortal men and to take it away. 

 id="file23242610" filename="Bless-a-Cross" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.wikihow.com/Bless-a-Cross">
 Log in 
 Social login does not work in incognito and private browsers. Please log in with your username or email to continue. 
 wikiHow is a “wiki,  similar to Wikipedia, which means that many of our articles are co-written by multiple authors. To create this article, 11 people, some anonymous, worked to edit and improve it over time. 
 Anyone may conduct a blessing over a cross, but understand that the blessing is a plea to God, not a guarantee of any effect. In many Christian traditions, a priest or other ordained church leader may conduct a formal blessing over a cross before displaying it in the church or using it in church ceremonies. 
 Choose a cross or crucifix. A plain cross consists of only the shape of the cross, while a crucifix also has an image of Christ on the cross. Either can be blessed, but only the crucifix is used in most official Catholic and Orthodox ceremonies. Protestants typically prefer the bare cross, not the crucifix. 
 Many variations on the cross and crucifix exist, with different numbers and types of crossbars, and the appearance or lack of various letters. If you belong to a church, you may wish to ask your priest or minister what type of cross your denomination uses. 
 Some crucifixes include a skull beneath Christ's feet, representing the bones of Adam. This is more common in Catholic tradition, but is not required or banned by most denominations. 
 Consider having a priest or other religious leader bless the cross. In many churches, including the Catholic church, a blessing from a priest, deacon, or other church leader is considered to be more effective than a layman's blessing. For a small cross, such as one you would wear around your neck, the blessing used is up to the priest. 
 One possible Catholic blessing: "May this cross and the one who uses it be blessed, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit."[1] X Research source 
 One possible Orthodox blessing: "O Creator and Author of mankind, Giver of spiritual graces and Bestower of eternal salvation: Do Thou, the same Lord, send down Thy Holy Spirit, with a blessing from on high, upon this cross, that, fortified by the might of heavenly protection, it may be potent unto bodily salvation and succor aid aid, unto all who shall desire to make use of it, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen."[2] X Research source 
 For more information on the difference between a priest's blessing and another person's, see the section on using the blessed cross. 
 Bless the cross yourself. Blessing the cross yourself may not carry the same effect as a priest's blessing, but anyone may plea to God to bless their cross or other object. You may recite any prayer while doing so, for instance one of the following: 
 Lord, bless this Cross that it may be an instrument of Your Divine Mercy in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, Amen. 
 Bless this Cross in the Name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, Amen. 
 For a publicly displayed Catholic cross or crucifix, have a priest recite the official blessing. While the Bible does not include any rituals for blessing the cross, the Catholic church has created a collection of official rituals called the Rituale Romanum. Here is a solemn blessing intended for crosses for display, such as on the wall of a church: 
 Priest: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 All: Who made heaven and earth. 
 Priest: The Lord be with you. 
 Priest: Let us pray. Holy Lord, almighty Father, everlasting God, be pleased to bless this cross, that it may be a saving help to mankind. Let it be the support of faith, an encouragement to good works, the redemption of souls; and let it be consolation, protection, and a shield against the cruel darts of the enemy; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 Priest: Let us pray. Lord Jesus Christ, bless this cross by which you snatched the world from Satan's grasp, and on which you overcame by your suffering the tempter to sin, who rejoiced in the first man's fall in eating of the forbidden tree. 
 (Priest sprinkles the cross with holy water) 
 Priest:May this cross be hallowed in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit; and may all who kneel and pray before this cross in honor of our Lord find health in body and soul; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 (After the recitation, the priest kneels before the cross, venerating and kissing it. Others may do the same.) 
 Understand sacramentals. In official Catholic practice, and in most other denominations, sacramental objects are most commonly created by God through the church, not through laymen. Sacramental objects, also called minor sacraments in the Orthodox tradition, potentially have similar, but not identical, effects, as the sacraments, which are rites of extreme importance to the church. Even within the same denomination, experts disagree on how effective sacramentals are, but according to some theologians, a cross blessed by a priest may be able to ward off evil or forgive venial (slight) sins.[3] X Research source 
 Protestant denominations have fewer official sacraments, and often avoid using the term. 
 Understand the nature of a blessing without a priest. An unordained person is welcome to conduct blessings, but these are pleas to God, not the ordained creation of a sacramental object. There are no guarantees that the cross will become holy, or consecrated. It may not be suitable for use in church ceremonies until it has received an official blessing by a church leader. 
 Wear small crosses or crucifixes with respect. The Catholic church doesn't give mandatory instructions for how to wear a small cross. Wear it as you like, but treat it with reverence. Do not wear it as a fashion statement or jewelry. Catholics are discouraged from wearing the cross in a manner that causes scandal or offense, even if you do not consider it disrespectful.[4] X Research source 
 Learn how to dispose of an old cross. A cross loses its blessing if it is sold for a profit, or if it is substantially broken. If it hasn't been broken, you may have the cross blessed a second time. If you are disposing of it instead, melt or break it into pieces to remove the appearance of a cross. You may use the melted metal for another purpose, or bury the pieces to return it to the earth. 
 Advertisement 
 Community Q&A 
 If a cross is sold for profit and you bless it yourself with pure intention, does it regain some of its intended holy properties back? 
 Community Answer 
 God wants us too spread the word of god. Even if you did bless it yourself, it should not be sold because you should want to show the love of God and that should not cost money. 
 Is it wrong for a Catholic to wear a crucifix or a saint's medal without it being blessed? 
 DR Berry 
 Community Answer 
 No. Sacred objects, such as a crucifix that you wear around your neck, aren't actually blessed by the priest but are instead importart for what they symbolize. 
 You don't need to wear a cross to receive blessings from the Christian God. You just need to become a Christian. 
 The cross is not unholy, it is the action of theft that lacks an element of holiness. So, your behavior in stealing it would be breaking a basic Christian tenet but the cross itself would be as blessed as always. And hey, don't steal that cross. If you ask for one, many a priest or Christian would happily give or get one for you. 
 Is it okay if I will be the one to bless my crucifix and candle with my holy water? 
 Community Answer 
 You can put holy water on your crucifix and candle and say a prayer, but only a priest has the ability to bless things. 
 When you said about disposing of the cross, is it fine if you leave the cross on the living room or something or you have to dispose of it? Do you also have to dispose of it? 
 Torpi 
 Top Answerer 
 You don't have to dispose of it. It's just that if the cross has been sold for profit or is very broken, the blessing is lost, so it is no longer taboo to dispose of it properly - but equally, you can still keep it, if you prefer. 
 Can you use a blessed cross to help protect a shelter? 
 Kathy5421 
 Community Answer 
 Yes, you can use a cross. Helping people to understand that they have God's protection is great for them while they live in a shelter. 
 Is it okay to give my grandson that is not baptized a cross blessed by a priest? 
 Purple Person 
 Community Answer 
 Yes, just because he is not baptized doesn’t mean he couldn’t benefit from a holy object. 
 My friend gave me a cross for my birthday and told me it was blessed. Is it ok to get it blessed again just in case? 
 VY 
 Community Answer 
 Blessings are always a positive thing. You can get it blessed as many times. The more the merrier. 
 Tips 
 Many blessings originated in another language, usually Latin, and may have multiple English translations. You may recognize a blessing but be used to a slightly different wording; feel free to use the version you are accustomed to, as long as the meaning is not changed. 
 The Catholic "Rituale Romanum" also contains an alternate, longer blessing for a publicly displayed cross. 
 Warnings 
 A Catholic cross cannot be officially blessed during Ash Wednesday, the three days from Good Friday to Easter Sunday, or on All Souls Day.[5] X Research source 
 About This Article 
 wikiHow is a “wiki,  similar to Wikipedia, which means that many of our articles are co-written by multiple authors. To create this article, 11 people, some anonymous, worked to edit and improve it over time. This article has been viewed 103,860 times. 
 Before blessing a cross, make sure you choose a suitable cross for your religion. For example, if you’re Catholic or Orthodox, you’ll need a crucifix, but if you’re Protestant, you’ll need a bare cross. While it is best to get a priest or other religious leader to say the blessing over the cross for you, you can say it yourself if you’d like and it will still be effective. You can do this by using a simple blessing, such as: “Bless this Cross in the Name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, Amen.  Keep reading for more tips on how to wear your blessed cross with respect. 
 Reader Success Stories 
 Did this article help you? 
 Yes No 
 Advertisement 
 Cookies make wikiHow better. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our cookie policy. 
 About This Article 
 Views: 103,860 
 By signing up you are agreeing to receive emails according to our privacy policy. 

 id="file23242703" filename="bless-and-curse-faq-innsmouth-pre-release" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://riteofseeking.com/2020/08/31/bless-and-curse-faq-innsmouth-pre-release/">
 Investigate. 
 Bless and Curse FAQ v1.01 (Innsmouth Pre-release) 
 Every new cycle, Arkham Horror likes to change the game up by adding new mechanics. For example, in The Dunwich Legacy, exile cards made their debut, while in The Forgotten Age, the game introduced seal cards for Mystics. For The Innsmouth Legacy, the major new mechanic for player cards being added is bless and curse tokens. 
 With the unusually long gap (due to the pandemic) between this cycle releasing and the previous cycle ending, I expect that more players than usual are going to be experiencing the Innsmouth Legacy as their first cycle. Innsmouth is going to be a bit of an unusual cycle to come in on because, as I will explain, it is very unique. My main goal is to explain bless and curse in as much detail as possible to newer players, because the implications of this new mechanic are not necessarily as cut and dry as they may look at first glance. However, if you are a veteran and want to brush up on some information on Bless and Curse before Innsmouth launches in early October, then welcome! Either way, I hope that this article will provide you all the information you need to understand the enigmatic bless and curse tokens. 
 AUTHOR’S NOTE: Keep in mind that this article is written Aug. 31st, so we have not seen all the possible information for Bless and Curse. This is simply working off of what we do know so far. 
 AUTHOR’S NOTE 2: Last updated Sept. 1. I added some additional detail to the FAQ based on feedback. I also previously said the designers confirmed bless and curse will never return, and this was false. The answer is updated appropriately. 
 The Facts What are bless and curse tokens? The Innsmouth Legacy comes with a punchboard of new tokens. There are 10 bless tokens and 10 curse tokens. These tokens can be added to or removed from the chaos bag itself, affecting the contents of the chaos bag in a new way. The below image shows what they look like. Note that when player cards interact with a bless and curse token, they use the symbol represented on the token, so it is best to get familiar with what the symbol looks like. Bless is on the left and curse is on the right. 
 See Tides of Fate as an example of a player card that uses the bless and curse symbols. Interpreting the symbols in just the second paragraph of the card, it reads “Replace all curse tokens in the chaos bag with an equal number of bless tokens. At the end of the round, replace all bless tokens in the chaos bag with an equal number of curse tokens.  
 What do bless and curse tokens do? 
 Once an effect in the game causes a bless or curse token to be added to the bag, that token can be drawn from the chaos bag like any other token. During a skill test, if a bless token is drawn, you immediately get +2 skill value on your test and must then draw and resolve an additional token. On the other hand, if a curse token is drawn, you immediately get -2 skill value on your test and, just like with bless, must then draw and resolve an additional token. In either case, any bless and curse tokens that were resolved are then removed from the chaos bag after being resolved during a skill test. 
 What if I reveal a bless token or a curse token outside of a skill test? 
 Resolve any effects as you normally would, and the bless or curse token is not removed. For example, Astral Travel requires you to reveal a token after playing it, and if it is a Skull, Cultist, Tablet, Elder Thing, or Autofail symbol, something bad happens to you. If you draw a curse token on this reveal, you avoid that effect, because a curse token does not meet the card’s stated requirement to trigger. The curse token is then returned to the bag, as it was not resolved during a skill test. 
 The same holds true if you were to reveal a bless or curse token during a skill test, but then ignore the token by some effect (like Jacqueline Fine’s investigator ability). If you are not resolving the token during the skill test, it does not get removed from the bag. 
 Wait, what happens if during one test I draw a bless token and then a curse token and then a bless token and then a curse token…? 
 Because they prompt you to draw again, these tokens can potentially chain into each other when drawn in succession. Simply continue resolving as normal, following the rules for bless and curse tokens, until you draw a token that does not require you to reveal any more tokens. Then, remove all bless and curse tokens that were revealed, as normal. 
 I have to add another bless or curse token but I am all out. What do I do? 
 There are a finite number of bless and curse tokens, ten of each. This is simply a feature of how bless and curse functions. So for example, if you have 10 bless tokens in the chaos bag, and an effect would cause you to add an eleventh bless token, this effect will fail. 
 Will this mechanic appear again after this cycle is over? 
 Possibly, but the future of bless and curse beyond Innsmouth is unknown. The designers have expressed that due to the requirement to have these special tokens to make the mechanic work, bless and curse appearing again is a bit of a logistical challenge. Any cycle featuring these cards would need to have the bless and curse token punchboard included again in order to allow the bless and curse cards from that cycle to work. It’s not impossible, but for now, it’s best to go ahead and assume the Innsmouth cycle is bless and curse’s singular moment to show up in the card pool. 
 So, then does this mean every card in Innsmouth will use bless and curse? 
 No. However, the majority of cards likely will. 
 Are there any investigators that specifically use this mechanic as their main feature? 
 Based on the reveals, so far we only know Sister Mary interacts with bless and curse tokens. As we do not yet have full reveals of all the Innsmouth investigators, it’s unknown if another investigator will also do this in any way. 
 What factions are associated with bless or curse? 
 Generally speaking, the bless factions are Guardian and Survivor, the curse factions are Seeker and Rogue, and Mystic are in between the two. 
 Based on the FFG Innsmouth livestream, all the factions will interact with bless and curse differently. Here is what we know about each faction’s relationship with bless and curse so far. 
 Guardian: Adds bless tokens to the bag, and likes to keep the tokens in the bag. Tries to make use of them in ways beyond pulling them for the +2 bonus. Survivor: Adds bless tokens to the bag, but likes to pull the tokens during skill tests and trigger additional effects upon pulling a bless token. Mystic: Interact with both bless and curse tokens. Can convert tokens to the other type. May have bonuses for maintaining both types of tokens in the bag. Seeker: Adds curse tokens to the bag, but likes to keep the tokens in the bag and not see them removed. Effects may be passively powered up by having a chaos bag with a lot of curse tokens in it. Rogue: Adds curse tokens to the bag, but works to avoid the repercussions of drawing the curse tokens during skill tests. 
 The Strategy 
 So how good is this anyway for token pulls? 
 It goes without saying that bless helps you pass tests, while curse hurts your chances. That much is obvious. However, the question of exactly how much gets into some detailed mathematics. Without getting too deep into the math, I will summarize by saying the following: 
 -The helpfulness of a bless pull is magnified on low-probability passes. Think tests where you are up by 0 or 1 only. 
 -If you were testing very high up anyway, the helpfulness of a bless pull is minimal. 
 -Curse hurts a lot. In general, the degree to which curse hurts your chances is significantly more than the degree to which bless helps your chances. 
 So basically, as far as the math goes, bless is good and curse is worse than bless is good. 
 It sounds like overall this mechanic skews towards making things worse for me. Why do I want to play with bless and curse then? 
 Because there are other player cards effects that interact with the tokens outside of simple +2 or -2 pulls. We don’t know all of the effects to make a complete analysis, but these other effects are very important to making bless and curse much more powerful for you. 
 For example, Ward of Radiance is a powerful Mystic cancel that has you pull 5 tokens when a treachery is drawn. If any of them are a bless token or an Elder Sign, you cancel the treachery’s revelation effect. If you compare this to Ward of Protection, it has numerous benefits. It costs 0, while Ward of Protection costs 1; it doesn’t deal a horror to you; and critically, it can be used on another investigator’s treachery draw. These are all really great upsides versus the classic mainstay cancel that is Ward of Protection. However, Ward of Radiance only has a good probability of passing if you have been faithfully adding bless tokens to the bag. Without bless tokens, the odds of this passing are low, meaning this card will often do nothing outside of a bless strategy. 
 On the other hand, for curse decks, you have a Rogue card like Faustian Bargain that has you divide 5 resources among investigators at your location and add 2 curse tokens to the bag. Five resources is a lot of resources. In terms of resources gained, this is like a level 2 Hot Streak, but you can play it with 0 resources to start and it can be divided up among your team members. If you have a plan to not be stressed about 2 curse tokens, then maybe you want to strike a deal and play a card like Faustian Bargain. 
 In addition, Covenants have been revealed as being added with the In Too Deep pack. Currently, it appears that Covenants are level 2 permanents that will change the way bless and curse tokens function on a skill test draw, and each faction has one Covenant in their card pool. An investigator may purchase only one Covenant. 
 Are there enough tools to make this an exciting space to build a deck? 
 First, we have not seen all the tools yet. Based on what has been revealed so far, opinions have been mixed. Some say there is enough support from what we have seen, some say we should wait to get more reveals, and some say it is unlikely we will ever get enough support to make it interesting for them to play based on the reveals. Regardless, you are certainly not forced into building a bless or curse deck just because you pick up Innsmouth. Remember, we have been playing decks without bless or curse since 2016 and we’ve been just fine. Whether or not something is exciting for you is really going to come down to your personal opinion. 
 What other strategies do bless and curse work with? 
 There are many things in the game already that complement bless and curse tokens. Here are a few examples. 
 Bless and curse itself. This one is pretty obvious; however, bless and curse synergizes heavily with more bless and curse effects, so it deserves to be said. 
 Succeed by X, for bless. You are much more likely to oversucceed on a bless pull. 
 Failure effects, for curse. You are more likely to fail with curses in the bag, meaning if you have a “when you fail  card on your Survivor your chances of being able to use it are higher 
 Effects that don’t test anything, for curse. If you are simply not testing, then the curse tokens don’t matter. 
 Token revealing cards, for either. With additional tokens in the bag, you are less likely to draw a bad symbol for the purposes of something like Astral Travel or Recharge. 
 Any recommendations for bless and curse decks? 
 Yes. Based on what I have seen already, I have some suggestions. Of course, this is not an exhaustive list! 
 Bless Mary. This one is no surprise, but of course, she has to be on the list. This deck focuses on passive support for the whole team by providing bless tokens that improve skill tests and other supports like Rite of Sanctification and Ward of Radiance. Beyond that, Mary’s card access is flexible enough that she can try to find clues or handle enemies as you need her to. 
 Curse Preston. Faustian Bargain is a huge influx of money and Preston avoids testing anyway. When he does test, he often wants to have a “when you fail  Survivor event handy, so the curses don’t punish him too, too much. In addition, Survivor is a bless faction, meaning if he wanted to, Preston can use a tool like Predestined or Token of Faith to help rotate the contents of the bag back towards being more blessed following his Faustian Bargain plays. 
 Curse Dexter. Note that this requires cards from In Too Deep, namely Armageddon and Eye of Chaos (think of them as Innsmouth Shrivelling/Rite of Seeking clones that cost more but have a significant bonus to you on curse draw). This build is similar to Curse Preston in that it relies on Faustian Bargain; however, these resources go towards paying for Armageddon and Eye of Chaos. These cards will give you a bonus effect on a curse reveal, helping to minimize the downside of adding the curses. In addition, Dexter can set up well to perform Will tests high enough that he can still pass even on a curse draw. 
 Bless Rex. This one is a little bit wacky, because Rex has a hard time supplying his own bless tokens given that Seeker is a curse faction. If anything you are probably needing a Mary to toss the bless tokens into the bag for Rex. But, the concept of Bless Rex is on a bless draw for an investigate, Rex is very likely to pass by 2, netting the extra clue. 
 Bless Mateo. This is some speculation, but it is highly anticipated to work. With Mateo’s Blessed access, he has access to 3 of the 5 Covenants from In Too Deep. This will give him a lot of flexibility to approach builds. He can also use cards like Rite of Sanctification to great effect. We still need to see more cards, but this space is looking very promising. 
 With that, this concludes my prerelease edition of my Bless and Curse FAQ. As more cards are revealed, I hope to update this. Thank you for reading my article and I hope that this helped you learn more about bless and curse! 

 id="file23242702" filename="blessed" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://idioms.thefreedictionary.com/blessed">
 blessed 
 bless (one) with (something) 
 1. To bestow something favorable upon someone, as of a gift from God. The Lord has blessed us with fine weather during the harvest season. 
 2. To anoint someone with something during a religious ritual. The priest blessed the baby with holy oil during the baptism ceremony. 
 blessed 
 A common hashtag on social media posts that may accompany a sincere expression of gratitude or may be used comically or as an attempt to mask bragging. It is sometimes spoken, usually humorously. How awesome is my new apartment?! #blessed My mom came over with chicken soup tonight because I wasn't feeling well. She's the best, hashtag blessed. Well, this adorable infant just puked on me. #blessed 
 blessed is he who expects nothing, for he shall never be disappointed 
 proverb Having high expectations often leads to disappointment when the desired result does not occur, so keeping expectations low will save one from being disappointed. I promised myself I wouldn't get my hopes up, so when I found out that my first-choice school had rejected me, I was actually OK with it. Blessed is he who expects nothing, for he shall never be disappointed. 
 blessed with (something) 
 Possessing something beneficial, such as a positive ability, quality, or general state of welfare. The phrase implies that such a thing was bestowed by a deity or through good fortune. My brother has been blessed with athletic abilities that the rest of us kids seriously lack. We should never forget that we have been blessed with wealth, and with that comes the responsibility to do good with it. 
 it is better to give than to receive 
 proverb It is more virtuous to give or yield something than to receive something. The idea is Biblical in origin. It is better to give than to receive, so we're going to donate these dolls to people who are less fortunate. Right, honey? 
 it is more blessed to give than to receive 
 proverb It is more virtuous to give or yield something than to receive something. The phrase comes from the Bible's Acts of the Apostles. It is more blessed to give than to receive, so we're going to donate these dolls to people who are less fortunate. Right, honey? 
 the blessed event 
 The birth of a baby. She's almost nine months pregnant, so the blessed event will be happening very soon! 
 blessed event 
 Fig. the birth of a child. My sister is expecting a blessed event sometime in May. The young couple anxiously awaited the blessed event. 
 Blessed is he who expects nothing, for he shall never be disappointed. 
 Prov. If you do not expect good things to happen, you will not be disappointed when they fail to happen. Ellen: This is going to be the best vacation we've ever had; we're going to have fun every minute of every day. Fred: Blessed is he who expects nothing, for he shall never be disappointed. Jill: Do you think you'll win the contest? Jane: I like to keep in mind that blessed is he who expects nothing, for he shall never be disappointed. 
 It is better to give than to receive. 
 and It is more blessed to give than to receive. 
 Prov. It is more virtuous to give things than to get them. (Biblical.) Susan told her children, "Instead of thinking so much about what you want for your birthday, think about what to give your brothers and sisters for their birthdays. Remember, it is better to give than to receive." Our charity encourages you to share the good things you have. It is more blessed to give than to receive. 
 blessed event 
 The birth of a baby, as in When is the blessed event expected? This expression combines two senses of blessed, that is, "happy" and "sacred." Today, however, unless used ironically, it is considered cloyingly sentimental. [1920s] 
 blessed event 
 The birth of a baby. This cloyingly sentimental cliché, dating from about 1920, may well be dying out. It uses blessed in the sense of “happy,  not in the ironic sense of “cursed  or “damned  (as in “Every blessed piece of today’s mail is a bill ). 
 Blessed Sacrament RC Primary School has been rated as Good at its most recent Ofsted inspection. 
 We have no issue with this festivity, what we want to ensure is to respect the blessed day of Friday and the media played its due role in changing the name of the shopping season,' said an official of CII while talking to reporter. 
 Human work gets blessed on Labor Day weekend, soldiers living and deceased on Memorial Day, parochial schools every September. 
 How welcoming the station lights must have been after the darkness, what a blessed place that must have seemed. 
 "I was blessed. She was a grandmother of a friend of ours and she lives in a very tiny hut... 
 Again, even though it was another long shot, the horse the priest had blessed won the race. 
 THE Archbishop of Wales yesterday blessed a caravan in a South Wales holiday park. 
 Surprisingly, it is not the first caravan the Archbishop has blessed, and in the past he has also blessed a fishing boat in Conwy Harbour. 

 id="file23242713" filename="blessed" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.wordreference.com/definition/bless%C3%A8d">
 Discover something new every day from News, Sports, Finance, Entertainment and more! 
 Check the checkbox to filter stream by Politics categoryPoliticsCheck the checkbox to filter stream by US News categoryUS NewsCheck the checkbox to filter stream by Celebrity categoryCelebrityCheck the checkbox to filter stream by Lifestyle categoryLifestyleCheck the checkbox to filter stream by Sports categorySportsCheck the checkbox to filter stream by Business categoryBusinessCheck the checkbox to filter stream by Entertainment categoryEntertainmentCheck the checkbox to filter stream by World News categoryWorld NewsCheck the checkbox to filter stream by Health categoryHealthCheck the checkbox to filter stream by Style categoryStyleCheck the checkbox to filter stream by Science categoryScienceCheck the checkbox to filter stream by Technology categoryTechnologyCheck the checkbox to filter stream by categoryAds 
 Ron Ervin told Insider of the tiny apartment in Harlem: "In New York, you're always out and about so the city is kind of your living room." 
 Nina Strohminger, a professor of legal studies and business ethics, tweeted she asked students what the average American makes. One Twitter user linked to New York Times data, showing the median family income of a student from Penn is $195,500. 
 Dealers who don't end bad practices like overcharging on reservation fees, adding massive "market adjustment" prices or using sales brokers will risk losing their Chevy Corvette Z06 allotments. 
 An almost-perfect fossil of a 180-million-year-old reptile was discovered in a drained reservoir in England. As Charlie D'Agata reports, the rare find of the bones of a "Sea Dragon" that is over 33-feet long may help scientists learn about why these beasts failed to adapt to a changing climate. 
 Thanks for your feedback! 
 Close this content, you can also use the Escape key at anytime 

 id="file23242695" filename="Blessed" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/topics/Blessed">
 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ, 
 “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. “Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted. “Blessed are the gentle, for they shall inherit the earth.read more. “Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. “Blessed are the merciful, for they shall receive mercy. “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. “Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called sons of God. “Blessed are those who have been persecuted for the sake of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. “Blessed are you when people insult you and persecute you, and falsely say all kinds of evil against you because of Me. Rejoice and be glad, for your reward in heaven is great; for in the same way they persecuted the prophets who were before you. 
 “Blessed shall you be when you come in, and blessed shall you be when you go out. 
 All these blessings will come upon you and overtake you if you obey the Lord your God: “Blessed shall you be in the city, and blessed shall you be in the country. “Blessed shall be the offspring of your body and the produce of your ground and the offspring of your beasts, the increase of your herd and the young of your flock.read more. “Blessed shall be your basket and your kneading bowl. “Blessed shall you be when you come in, and blessed shall you be when you go out. “The Lord shall cause your enemies who rise up against you to be defeated before you; they will come out against you one way and will flee before you seven ways. The Lord will command the blessing upon you in your barns and in all that you put your hand to, and He will bless you in the land which the Lord your God gives you. 
 Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord, The people whom He has chosen for His own inheritance. 
 His descendants will be mighty on earth; The generation of the upright will be blessed. 
 “Blessed shall be the offspring of your body and the produce of your ground and the offspring of your beasts, the increase of your herd and the young of your flock. 
 And I will bless those who bless you, And the one who curses you I will curse. And in you all the families of the earth will be blessed.  
 But even if you should suffer for the sake of righteousness, you are blessed. And do not fear their intimidation, and do not be troubled, 
 The Lord bless you, and keep you; The Lord make His face shine on you, And be gracious to you; The Lord lift up His countenance on you, And give you peace.’ 
 But He said, “On the contrary, blessed are those who hear the word of God and observe it.  
 the blessing, if you listen to the commandments of the Lord your God, which I am commanding you today; 
 Blessed is he who reads and those who hear the words of the prophecy, and heed the things which are written in it; for the time is near. 
 Blessed be the Lord, who daily bears our burden, The God who is our salvation. Selah. 
 O taste and see that the Lord is good; How blessed is the man who takes refuge in Him! 
 “Behold, I have received a command to bless; When He has blessed, then I cannot revoke it. 
 Her children rise up and bless her; Her husband also, and he praises her, saying: 
 whom the Lord of hosts has blessed, saying, “Blessed is Egypt My people, and Assyria the work of My hands, and Israel My inheritance.  
 And blessed is she who believed that there would be a fulfillment of what had been spoken to her by the Lord.  
 Blessed is a man who perseveres under trial; for once he has been approved, he will receive the crown of life which the Lord has promised to those who love Him. 
 He blessed him and said, “Blessed be Abram of God Most High, Possessor of heaven and earth; 
 from the same mouth come both blessing and cursing. My brethren, these things ought not to be this way. 
 How blessed is the man whose quiver is full of them; They will not be ashamed When they speak with their enemies in the gate. 
 It is you who are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant which God made with your fathers, saying to Abraham, ‘And in your seed all the families of the earth shall be blessed.’ 
 How blessed is the man whose strength is in You, In whose heart are the highways to Zion! 
 Aleph. How blessed are those whose way is blameless, Who walk in the law of the Lord. 
 Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord; We have blessed you from the house of the Lord. 
 A faithful man will abound with blessings, But he who makes haste to be rich will not go unpunished. 
 Daniel said, “Let the name of God be blessed forever and ever, For wisdom and power belong to Him. 
 For You make him most blessed forever; You make him joyful with gladness in Your presence. 
 They blessed Rebekah and said to her, “May you, our sister, Become thousands of ten thousands, And may your descendants possess The gate of those who hate them.  
 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to His great mercy has caused us to be born again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 
 saying with a loud voice,“Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power and riches and wisdom and might and honor and glory and blessing.  
 Bring the whole tithe into the storehouse, so that there may be food in My house, and test Me now in this,  says the Lord of hosts, “if I will not open for you the windows of heaven and pour out for you a blessing until it overflows. 
 Your wife shall be like a fruitful vine Within your house, Your children like olive plants Around your table. 
 looking for the blessed hope and the appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior, Christ Jesus, 
 For in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth, the sea and all that is in them, and rested on the seventh day; therefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day and made it holy. 
 Then God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, because in it He rested from all His work which God had created and made. 
 But one who looks intently at the perfect law, the law of liberty, and abides by it, not having become a forgetful hearer but an effectual doer, this man will be blessed in what he does. 
 The king has also said thus, ‘Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, who has granted one to sit on my throne today while my own eyes see it.’  
 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ, 
 Then God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, because in it He rested from all His work which God had created and made. 
 looking for the blessed hope and the appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior, Christ Jesus, 
 For the choir director. A Psalm of David. How blessed is he who considers the helpless; The Lord will deliver him in a day of trouble. 
 Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord, The people whom He has chosen for His own inheritance. 
 He will love you and bless you and multiply you; He will also bless the fruit of your womb and the fruit of your ground, your grain and your new wine and your oil, the increase of your herd and the young of your flock, in the land which He swore to your forefathers to give you. 
 He blessed him and said, “Blessed be Abram of God Most High, Possessor of heaven and earth; 

 id="file23242775" filename="blessed-are-the-woke-of-heart.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.catholiceducation.org/en/religion-and-philosophy/spiritual-life/blessed-are-the-woke-of-heart.html">
 Blessed Are the Woke of Heart 
 FATHER PAUL SCALIA 
 Advent is the time to shake off drowsiness of heart. 
 Drowsiness can be a dangerous thing. At work it can lead to a deadly typo, an ill-advised email, or a calculation error. It can also put us in physical danger. Hence the rumble strips on the side of the highway and the warning label on medicines: May cause drowsiness and dizziness; do not operate heavy machinery while taking this medication. 
 That's just physical drowsiness. Today our Lord speaks of a different, more dangerous drowsiness, that of the heart: Beware that your hearts do not become drowsy from carousing and drunkenness and the anxieties of daily life. In Scripture, the heart indicates more than just an organ or the place of emotions. It describes the innermost dimension of the person, where thoughts, choices, and — most of all — love reside. This drowsiness, then, is a lethargy of the intellect and will, of the capacity to love. Its dangers resemble those of physical tiredness but are far more deadly. It ultimately brings the danger of becoming a spiritual zombie: walking around and functioning, but really being dead inside. 
 Of its very nature, love requires vigilance. Our hearts need to be alert and attentive to operate properly. When they grow drowsy, we lose the discipline necessary to love properly. We begin to make mistakes and poor choices. As physical drowsiness affects our eyes, so spiritual drowsiness affects our mind's eye. We miscalculate what is truly good and worthy of our love and then how to love. Our affections go off track and collide with the wrong things. If the heart is not refreshed and alert it is easily misled. 
 This kind of drowsiness accounts for most of the evils we commit. We do not typically choose evil because we know it's evil or because we want to do evil. It's rather that we choose evil and sin because the heart becomes drowsy. It slowly but surely grows incapable of discerning the true and the good. It becomes undisciplined in its choices and slouches into the path of least resistance. Rather than the arduous good, it opts for what is easy, popular, and comfortable. 
 This kind of drowsiness accounts for most of the evils we commit. 
 Our Lord indicates two causes of this drowsiness. First, "carousing and drunkenness." Now, don't think you're off the hook just because you're not out carousing or getting drunk. This phrase indicates not just those specific vices, but indulgence of the body in general. It means our elevation of food, drink, and other physical pleasures to a higher level than they deserve and thus our allowing them an outsized influence on our choices. 
 These habits of the flesh slowly but surely put the heart to sleep. Have you ever been more alert after a huge meal and a lot of drink? And how tired were you the next morning? The person with little self-control regarding food, drink, and sex typically makes more and more poor decisions because those indulgences tug the heart down from the higher spiritual things to the carnal. 
 It is a penitential season in which we detach ourselves from both indulgence and busyness. 
 It works another way as well. No matter how irrationally we behave, we are still rational creatures and need a reason for our actions. The more attached we are to the indulgence of the flesh, the more we must dragoon our intellect into justifying what we do. We tug it down from its place of privilege to rationalize the body's desires. 
 The second cause of this drowsiness is what our Lord calls "the anxieties of daily life." We become spiritually numb when we allow the demands of the day — the tyranny of the urgent — to overtake our spiritual practices. When the pace of life that we've created elbows God out of the schedule and prompts us to forego our prayer, spiritual reading, confession or even Mass because. . .then we're too busy. Something has to give. 
 These habits of the flesh slowly but surely put the heart to sleep. 
 Although the opposite of carousing and drunkenness, this busy-ness produces the same result: dullness regarding the matters of the soul. Anxiety is both a symptom and a cause of being too enmeshed in this world and inattentive to the next. 
 Thus, we bring about a drowsiness of heart by alternatingly indulging the body and manufacturing busyness. Indeed, the extremes of indulgence and anxiety work quite well together. We become anxious because of our busyness; we indulge the flesh to relieve our anxiety; which only leads to more anxiety. Either way the heart grows weary, tired, drowsy, and susceptible to false loves. And our culture seems eerily adept at producing both extremes. There has perhaps never been a culture so indulgent and anxious at once. 
 The severity of this Gospel might seem inappropriate for this time of year. Having raced ahead to Christmas already, most people expect a more joyful message. In fact, however, what we need right now is precisely a warning against carousing and drunkenness and the anxieties of daily life. It's this time of year especially that we indulge in food and drink and become — ironically — stressed by the holidays. 
 Advent is the time to shake off drowsiness of heart. It is a penitential season in which we detach ourselves from both indulgence and busyness. The way to prepare for our Lord's birth is to refrain from excessive food and drink and to master our schedules, so that we don't become drowsy from indulgence or anxiety. Christ was born in the wee hours of the morning. The celebration of His birth is not for the drowsy of heart. Only the wakeful can grasp Christmas joy. 
 Acknowledgement 
 Father Paul Scalia. "Blessed Are the Woke of Heart." The Catholic Thing (November 28 26, 2021). 
 Reprinted with permission of The Catholic Thing. 
 The Author 
 Father Scalia studied theology at the Pontifical Gregorian University and the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, both in Rome. Since his ordination in 1996 he has served as parochial vicar at Saint Bernadette, Saint Patrick, and Saint Rita parishes, and as pastor of Saint John the Beloved. He currently serves as the Episcopal Vicar for Clergy. He has written for various publications and is a frequent speaker on matters of faith and doctrine. Father Scalia is the author of That Nothing May Be Lost:Reflections on Catholic Doctrine and Devotion , and Sermons in Times of Crisis: Twelve Homilies to Stir Your Soul. Father Paul Scalia is the son of Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia, R.I.P. 

 id="file23242756" filename="blessed-are-those-who-are-persecuted" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://godversusreligion.com/blessed-are-those-who-are-persecuted/">
 Blessed are those who are persecuted 
 Blessed are those who are persecuted. Huh? Persecuted for what? And why? Why is it a blessing to be persecuted? And what is the blessing that’s received? If you don’t know what this is about, it probably sounds like someone’s really into being dumped on. But then, if you’re a regular here, you know what this is about. It’s the conclusion to our series on the Beatitudes. 
 While you can certainly read this and get something out of it, I highly recommend checking out the series. It goes through an in-depth look at each of the Beatitudes. How they relate to the Old Testament, to the people Jesus spoke to at the time, and how that translates into actions for us today. It also shows how each one builds upon the previous ones, including how they form an iterative process for us to become increasingly closer to Jesus as we grow in our faith. 
 Blessed are the persecuted – what does persecute mean? 
 As is often the case, we need to start with a look at exactly what “persecute  means. What it meant when Jesus spoke. And what it means to us today when we read His words. 
 Let’s start with today. dictionary.com says this about persecute: 
 persecute 
 verb (used with object), per·se·cut·ed, per·se·cut·ing. 
 to pursue with harassing or oppressive treatment, especially because of religious or political beliefs, ethnic or racial origin, gender dentity, or sexual orientation. 
 to annoy or trouble persistently. 
 That’s not a bad start. Obviously, the word is applied to a much broader swath of people than what Jesus had in mind. When we get to reading the actual verses, this will become clear. The other thing we’ll find is that persecution then, as well as today, can be more than annoying or causing trouble. It did, and does, go all the way up to killing people. 
 Next, let’s look at the word from the point of view of a biblical dictionary. 
 PERSECUTION 
 Persecution is aggressive and injurious behavior carried out in a hostile, antagonistic spirit, normally by a group. Persecutors are known especially for their fiery zeal (Phil 3:6), a zeal that is described elsewhere as “not based on knowledge  (Rom 10:2 NIV). Persecution itself is a terror, more or less inevitable in the biblical world, especially the NT. 
 Persecution as a terror is a very different picture than what we think of with the word annoy. Of course, annoyances can get to be terrifying, but certainly not all annoyances reach the level of terror. As such, we see the bar raised for what minimally is seen as biblical persecution compared to the common usage of the word today. 
 Persecution and its attendant spirit of animosity are set against the backdrop of the Bible’s dramatic portrayal of Satan’s great enmity against God and his people. 
 So persecution is a weapon of the evil in the battle between good and evil. Unfortunately, those who are supposed to be on the side of good in that battle don’t always respond as we should. We’ll read below how Christians should respond to persecution. The final paragraph of this excerpt goes over those times when we fail. The times when we resort to persecution of our persecutors, which is not the proper response. 
 It is concretely expressed in the antagonism of the wicked (described as the children of the devil, Jn 8:44) toward the righteous (the children of God, Rev 12:17). It is thus no surprise that the image of persecution is so pervasive in the Bible, for it falls upon God’s people by virtue of their relationship to him (Jn 15:18–21). This sense of solidarity and union with Christ and his people is movingly described in Acts 9:4, where the risen Jesus asks Saul, persecutor of followers of the Way, “Why do you persecute me?  In fact, persecution serves as a sign of the authenticity of one’s relationship to Jesus (Mt 5:10, 12; Phil 1:29) and one’s response as a veritable litmus test to determine that authenticity (Mt 13:20–21). Disciples can count on persecution. Those who respond in faith will be counted as righteous; however, “many will turn away from the faith  (see Mt 24:9–11 NIV). 
 Notice – persecution serves as a sign of the authenticity of one’s relationship to Jesus. I often wonder, when things are going too well, am I slipping away in my relationship with Jesus? While no one really wants to be persecuted, I can’t help but feel that the total lack of troubles could be a cause for concern. It’s as if the devil has decided we aren’t worth his effort. In other words, no effort needed because he’s already got us. 
 In light of the above, persecution in the Bible is primarily of a religious nature (although ethnic persecution occurs, as in Esther). In this spiritual context it assumes a number of different forms: physical (beatings, Is 50:6; stonings, Acts 14:19), verbal (mocking, Lk 23:11; insults, Ps 69:9; slander, Rev 2:9), social (excommunication or ostracism, Jn 9:22) or mental (intimidation, Lk 13:31; threats, Acts 4:21, 29). Persecution also involves or can lead to imprisonment (Mk 6:17), banishment (Rev 1:9; see Outcast), even death (2 Chron 24:21; Rev 2:10). 
 We see here a better description than just to say annoyances. It shows a broad spectrum of things that come under the umbrella of persecution. 
 Because persecution is inevitable for the truly righteous (Phil 1:29; 2 Tim 3:12), the people of God are exhorted to respond positively. Negative reactions such as fear (Phil 1:28; 1 Pet 3:14; Rev 2:10), compromise (Gal 6:12), cursing (Rom 12:14), desertion (Mt 26:56), retaliation (Rom 12:17–21) or apostasy (Heb 10:32–39) deny potential Christian witness. Instead believers are to commit themselves to God (1 Pet 4:19), rejoice because of the great eschatological reward awaiting them (Mt 5:12), demonstrate patience (1 Cor 4:12) and perseverance (Heb 10:36), and pray for those who inflict persecution upon them (Mt 5:44). [1]Ryken, L., Wilhoit, J., Longman, T., Duriez, C., Penney, D., & Reid, D. G. (2000). In Dictionary of biblical imagery (electronic ed., pp. 635–636). Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press. 
 Finally, as mentioned earlier, some of the occasions when we fail to respond appropriately to persecution, and what to do about that. 
 Blessed are the persecuted – the passage 
 Now that we’ve seen what persecuted meant when Jesus spoke, and have a better idea of how His words apply to us today, let’s look at the final passage in the Beatitudes. 
 Mt 5:10 Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Mt 5:11 “Blessed are you when people insult you, persecute you and falsely say all kinds of evil against you because of me. 12 Rejoice and be glad, because great is your reward in heaven, for in the same way they persecuted the prophets who were before you. 
 You hopefully noticed, there are two sets of “blessed are …  verses related to persecution. After seven verses, with seven “Blessed are …  statements, I can’t help but feel that two statements in three verses about being blessed because of persecution is important. When Jesus says something twice, it’s a reaffirmation that yes, it really is going to happen. 
 After reading the first seven verses of the Beatitudes, it’s like Jesus knows we really need to be aware of the cost involved in doing those first seven things. It’s like something He said to His disciples. 
 Lk 14:25 Large crowds were traveling with Jesus, and turning to them he said: 26 “If anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and mother, his wife and children, his brothers and sisters—yes, even his own life—he cannot be my disciple. 27 And anyone who does not carry his cross and follow me cannot be my disciple. 
 Lk 14:28 “Suppose one of you wants to build a tower. Will he not first sit down and estimate the cost to see if he has enough money to complete it? 29 For if he lays the foundation and is not able to finish it, everyone who sees it will ridicule him, 30 saying, ‘This fellow began to build and was not able to finish.’ 
 Lk 14:31 “Or suppose a king is about to go to war against another king. Will he not first sit down and consider whether he is able with ten thousand men to oppose the one coming against him with twenty thousand? 32 If he is not able, he will send a delegation while the other is still a long way off and will ask for terms of peace. 33 In the same way, any of you who does not give up everything he has cannot be my disciple. 
 Lk 14:34 “Salt is good, but if it loses its saltiness, how can it be made salty again? 35 It is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile; it is thrown out. “He who has ears to hear, let him hear.  
 But then, Jesus also reaffirms the blessings of the persecution as well. 
 I feel like we need this. After all, remember what happened when one large crowd followed Jesus, and wasn’t prepared for what he said at the end. 
 Jesus had a large crowd – over 5,000 people. They listened to Him. Saw miracles. Were healed. But then were told about eating His flesh and drinking His blood – which is now known as Communion, a remembrance of the Last Supper. However, they weren’t ready for that last part. So this happened: 
 Jn 6:60 On hearing it, many of his disciples said, “This is a hard teaching. Who can accept it?  
 Jn 6:61 Aware that his disciples were grumbling about this, Jesus said to them, “Does this offend you? 62 What if you see the Son of Man ascend to where he was before! 63 The Spirit gives life; the flesh counts for nothing. The words I have spoken to you are spirit and they are life. 64 Yet there are some of you who do not believe.  For Jesus had known from the beginning which of them did not believe and who would betray him. 65 He went on to say, “This is why I told you that no one can come to me unless the Father has enabled him.  
 Jn 6:66 From this time many of his disciples turned back and no longer followed him. 
 Jn 6:67 “You do not want to leave too, do you?  Jesus asked the Twelve. 
 Jn 6:68 Simon Peter answered him, “Lord, to whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life. 69 We believe and know that you are the Holy One of God.  
 Blessed are the persecuted – why this could be so hard to accept 
 In the passage above, we looked at people who weren’t ready for Jesus’ message. Now, think about what’s happening here in the Beatitudes. We’ve just been told we should be happy to: 
 Give up a lot of our own desires, and substitute those from God instead. 
 Mourn, not only for ourselves, but others, even for people we don’t even know, because that’s right in the eyes of God. 
 Be meek, taking an ego hit by giving up on our own power, and using God’s power instead to accomplish things we can’t do on our own. 
 Seek the very righteousness that Jesus tells us is going to be the cause of our persecution. 
 Be merciful to others, even to people we know will never return that behavior to us. 
 Be pure in heart, knowing full well that many of our sources of pleasure are anything but pure in God’s eyes. 
 Be a peacemaker, a pretty much thankless job that requires us to understand both sides of issues from people that likely hate each other and can’t agree on much of anything. 
 After that, all the things we have to go through to reach even starting positions in that list of things from Jesus, now He tells us we’re going to be persecuted for doing them? If that’s not cause for the unprepared to run away, I don’t know what is. It seems like Jesus has a habit of saving the worst for last. 
 And yet, if we stick around long enough, we find out that Jesus actually saves the best for last. Did you notice verse 10? 
 Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 Does that sound a bit familiar? How about the very first Beatitude? 
 Mt 5:3 Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 Wow. We start with the reward for recognizing that we need the Holy Spirit = for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 And now we see at end, the reward for suffering through persecution = for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 Remember when I said this was an iterative process? We grow ever closer to Jesus as we proceed. And at each Beatitude, we not only need the ones before them, but we also can become even better at the ones before them. Why? Because that initial gift of for theirs is the kingdom of heaven begins right away. As soon as we begin to let go of our selfish spirit and allow the Holy Spirit to guide us. 
 And here, Jesus reaffirms, again, what He said all along. for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. For ours is the kingdom of Heaven. And it becomes a larger and larger part of our lives every step along the way. And that is how we come to be blessed by the persecution. 
 Blessed are the persecuted – what it doesn’t mean 
 Blessed are the persecuted doesn’t mean every time something bad happens to us it’s persecution. Sometimes, stuff really does happen. Bad things aren’t always about someone persecuting us. For instance, if we stand on the top part of a step ladder (you’re not supposed to do that) and fall, it’s because we did something dumb. Something we’re warned about and should know better than to even try. But then, we do it anyway. I’ve been lucky – I have been on that top step but never fell off. 
 Blessed are the persecuted – it’s not about us 
 To make that point, let’s look at something Luke recorded. It’s very similar to the Beatitudes in Matthew’s Gospel. From the two descriptions, Matthew’s and Luke’s, it appears to be two different locations. Matthew’s is known as the Sermon on the Mount. Luke’s as the Sermon on the Plain. There’s also the difference in point of view. Matthew was Jewish while Like was a Gentile. As such, the lack of a perfect match between them is natural, and not an indication of anything wrong. 
 My reason for choosing Matthew to do this series is exactly because he brought the Jewish point of view. That’s gives us a reference point back to the Old Testament. However, now that we’re looking at persecution, I think it’s better to see what Luke wrote. 
 Blessed are the persecuted – in Luke’s Gospel 
 To that end, here’s Luke’s recording of the Sermon on the Plain. 
 Lk 6:17 He went down with them and stood on a level place. A large crowd of his disciples was there and a great number of people from all over Judea, from Jerusalem, and from the coast of Tyre and Sidon, 18 who had come to hear him and to be healed of their diseases. Those troubled by evil spirits were cured, 19 and the people all tried to touch him, because power was coming from him and healing them all. Lk 6:20 Looking at his disciples, he said: “Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God. Lk 6:21 Blessed are you who hunger now, for you will be satisfied. Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh. 
 These first verses aren’t as different as they may seem when compared to what Matthew wrote. The Greek behind the English words is very much in line with Matthew’s writing of Sermon on the Mount. Really, it’s not surprising that Jesus doesn’t use the exact same words. Over the course of His three year ministry on earth, He doubtless gave similar messages to various groups of people as He traveled. The message was likely customized to the audience at each location as well. 
 The following verses are the ones we’ll pay attention to for this topic – persecution. 
 Lk 6:22 Blessed are you when men hate you, when they exclude you and insult you and reject your name as evil, because of the Son of Man. 
 There’s something interesting about that word hate. 
 3404 μισέω [miseo /mis·eh·o/] v. From a primary misos (hatred); TDNT 4:683; TDNTA 597; GK 3631; 42 occurrences; AV translates as “hate  41 times, and “hateful  once. 1 to hate, pursue with hatred, detest. 2 to be hated, detested. [2]Strong, J. (1995). Enhanced Strong’s Lexicon. Woodside Bible Fellowship. 
 Did you notice the part about pursue with hatred? It’s not obvious here in verse 22. However, Matthew records Jesus using the same word later in the Sermon on the Mount: 
 Mt 6:19 “Do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust destroy, and where thieves break in and steal. 20 But store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where moth and rust do not destroy, and where thieves do not break in and steal. 21 For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also. 
 Mt 6:22 “The eye is the lamp of the body. If your eyes are good, your whole body will be full of light. 23 But if your eyes are bad, your whole body will be full of darkness. If then the light within you is darkness, how great is that darkness! 
 Mt 6:24 “No one can serve two masters. Either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and Money.  
 Notice verse 24, where Jesus says, Either he will hate the one and love the other. There is an element of pursuit in that statement. We pursue the things we love. We avoid the things we hate. Well, usually. The exception comes when we hate something or someone so much that we feel a compulsion to do something about it. 
 I feel like it really applies here, in this discussion of hatred toward Jesus. I’ve had discussions with atheists, where I’ve seen the passion with which they read the Bible. True – they don’t understand it. And yet, they spend so much time reading and studying it. More than many Christians, I dare say. And their hatred for the God they read about in the Bible spurs them on to study more, and spew their hatred out at any opportunity. 
 Their hatred of Jesus drives them to pursue Him. And to pursue anyone who loves Him. I’ve asked some of them whether their desire to learn so much about God might in fact come from the Holy Spirit. That maybe, if they open their minds and their hearts, they’d come away with a different attitude about Jesus. Sadly, that’s usually the end of the conversation. 
 But my point here is, yes, hatred can, and does, cause some people to pursue the object of their hatred. And along the way they inflict any kind of punishment they can on those who love the thing they hate. Insults, as Luke records, are just one of the ways they try to persecute. 
 Ultimately though, as Jesus points out – it’s not because of us. It’s because of Him. 
 Lk 6:23 “Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, because great is your reward in heaven. For that is how their fathers treated the prophets. 
 Rejoicing over the persecution just sounds so counterintuitive. And yet, it’s not. Early on in this series, I wrote something called A note on happiness. It speaks to that. For a much deeper look at joy and persecution, please check out Too much joy? 
 Lk 6:24 “But woe to you who are rich, for you have already received your comfort. Lk 6:25 Woe to you who are well fed now, for you will go hungry. Woe to you who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep. Lk 6:26 Woe to you when all men speak well of you, for that is how their fathers treated the false prophets.  
 Blessed are the persecuted – what it does mean 
 Quite simple, Blessed are the persecuted means we will: 
 Just in case you didn’t recognize that list, it’s the “for they will  part of each of the Beatitudes. 
 Conclusion – Blessed are those who are persecuted 
 If you didn’t go back and read Too much joy?, I’ll suggest again that you do. It goes into the passage below, from James. 
 Jas 1:2 Consider it pure joy, my brothers, whenever you face trials of many kinds, 3 because you know that the testing of your faith develops perseverance. 4 Perseverance must finish its work so that you may be mature and complete, not lacking anything. 
 … 
 It’s important for this topic. I’ve already said, many times, that as we move through the Beatitudes, each builds on the previous ones. And each one also requires some amount of the previous ones in order to accomplish that one. It’s a clear case of building a foundation that gets stronger and stronger. 
 It also involves an iterative process, where we continually go back to the first one, and progress through them, over and over. And each time, again, we get stronger because of them. Our faith grows. There’s less of us and more of the Holy Spirit, as we continue to give more and more of ourselves to Him. That’s transformation. And it’s dying to self. Both of which are important parts of growing as a Christian. 
 But we can’t stop with just the first seven Beatitudes. We must continue on into number eight. Into the part where Jesus talks about persecution. We just have to. Because it will come. Jesus guaranteed it. So we must not only go through it, but we must even embrace it. It’s the only way to grow. 
 If we pick and choose among the Beatitudes, part of Jesus’ “manifesto  on how to be a Christian in the Sermon on the Mount, we settle for less. Less of the Holy Spirit in us. Less of our life being led by what Jesus taught. Less of an impact for Jesus in this world. Less than we could be. So much less. 
 We were meant for greatness in His name, through His power. But it’s not saying a few words. It’s not reading the Bible once. And it’s not reading and then saying “I got this ! It’s about doing. Always about doing. Action. And action brings persecution. 
 And so, ultimately, if we want to be a true follower of Jesus, we must embrace all of the Beatitudes. All of them! 
 Strong, J. (1995). Enhanced Strong’s Lexicon. Woodside Bible Fellowship. 
 Please leave a comment or ask a question - it's nice to hear from you. Cancel reply 
 By continuing to use the site, you agree to the use of cookies. more information Accept 
 The cookie settings on this website are set to "allow cookies" to give you the best browsing experience possible. If you continue to use this website without changing your cookie settings or you click "Accept" below then you are consenting to this. 

 id="file23242714" filename="blessedisshe.net" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://blessedisshe.net/">
 DAILY DEVOTIONS 
 WELCOME TO BLESSED IS SHE 
 join the sisterhood 
 YOUR HEART DESERVES IT 
 He wants you to be filled up by His great love and mercy, and we want that for you, too. 
 Blessed is She is a sisterhood who desires two things: prayer + community. If that sounds up your alley, we're so glad you're here. 
 CHOOSE YOUR OWN ADVENTURE 
 01 
 DAILY DEVOTIONS 
 Get an email in your inbox every single day that dives into Scripture. We want to know God, so we want to read His Word. Join us. 
 02 
 FIND YOUR COMMUNITY 
 Whether it be texting one friend or finding new people, we are here to support you. We can't wait to see your community come to life. 
 03 
 USE OUR RESOURCES 
 If you'd love resources to help you in your daily prayer life, we've made products just for you. From prayer journals to liturgical planners to so many in between. 
 LATEST ON THE BLOG 
 It's the mark of the first Beatitude, and yet we are quick to breeze past it. It's why the ... 
 The Effects of Hope // Positive Attitude Years ago, shortly after my grandfather died, I ... 
 The Catechism of the Catholic Church on Hope I was going for an afternoon walk with a ... 
 BROWSE THE SHOP 
 GRAB A CUP OF COFFEE AND SHOP THE LATEST PRODUCTS AND RESOURCES MADE JUST FOR YOU. 
 INFO 
 SOCIAL 
 This website uses cookies for analytical purposes. By choosing to continue, I’ll understand you agree with privacy policy + cookies policy 

 id="file23242758" filename="blessed-john-brenner-inspires-religious-order" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://osvnews.com/2018/10/07/blessed-john-brenner-inspires-religious-order/">
 Type to search 
 Blessed John Brenner inspires religious order 
 Members of the Cistercian order attend the beatification of the martyred Father John Brenner on May 1 in Hungary. Courtesy photo 
 Father John Brenner (1931-57), a Hungarian Cistercian priest and martyr, was beatified May 1. Living in communist Hungary, Father Brenner was called to give last rites to a dying man, but it turned out the request was a ruse and instead he was attacked and murdered. His cause for canonization was allowed to begin in 1990 after the fall of communism in Hungary. 
 Hungarian Cistercian Father Denis Farkasfalvy, 81, abbot emeritus of the Cistercian Abbey of Our Lady of Dallas in Irving, Texas (cistercian.org/abbey/), met Blessed John on three different occasions while living in his native Hungary and since has made an extensive study of his life. He has worked to promote the martyr’s story both to younger religious in his community as well as to laypeople. 
 He spoke with Our Sunday Visitor about the imprint left by the beatified martyr’s life. 
 Our Sunday Visitor: How did you come to meet Blessed John Brenner? 
 Father Denis Farkasfalvy: Blessed John was six years older than me, but I had an older brother who was with him in religious life. On one occasion, for example, I recall opening the door to our house when Blessed John rang the bell. He had come over for a gathering. Once he was inside, though, I’m sure he paid little attention to me! 
 OSV: What qualities or virtues do you think Blessed John had? 
 Father Farkasfalvy: He had a deep faith and a dedication to the priesthood. Most impressive to me, however, was his magnetic personality. He was a joyful man, and his happiness was felt by those he met. People would stop him on the street just to speak with him. 
 He was also good with youth. He was an athlete and would play soccer with the boys. It gave him a chance to hold religion classes, too, so he could teach them the Faith. He’d do it in a way that was fascinating and emanated joy. He really was the ideal priest. 
 But his popularity irked the government and would cost Blessed John his life. 
 OSV: What do you remember about Blessed John’s murder? 
 Father Farkasfalvy: It was 1957, and I was studying in Rome. We knew Hungarians were being imprisoned for their beliefs, with some being executed for their participation in the 1956 Hungarian revolution. But we were still astonished that a young priest was brutally murdered — stabbed 32 times and stomped with boots — rather than arrested and put on trial. 
 The authorities did a poor job hiding the fact that he was murdered, and it became known within a few weeks. The regime forbade the mention of his name, even going to the seminary to remove his photographs and take his name off plaques. They did these asinine things to make him disappear. 
 But his village started a cult of his martyrdom. People made pilgrimages to the site of his murder. They collected money and built a church there. The local population kept his memory alive. 
 I myself have been active in promoting Blessed John’s story. I wrote an article for a Hungarian journal and have spread the word within our order and school. I was able to persuade both our abbot and abbot general to go to his beatification. 
 OSV: Your monastery, Our Lady of Dallas, continues the work of Blessed John and the Hungarian Cistercians in the United States. 
 Father Farkasfalvy: Yes. We’re a small monastery in Texas [27 members]. We were started by Hungarian Cistercians in 1958. I came in 1962. We have our own school next door to the monastery, which has 350 boys grades 5-12. We give the boys a classical European education, adopted to U.S. expectations and needs. Fifteen of our priests teach at the school. Some of our priests are also employed to teach at the University of Dallas. 
 When I came as a refugee from Hungary, I had a doctorate in theology. I had hoped to teach theology for the University of Dallas. My superior, however, wanted me to get a degree in math and teach high school students. He wanted me to be competent in other disciplines besides theology. I have taught math most of my life; I also became headmaster of the school for 12 years. 
 In 1988, I became abbot of the monastery and served for 24 years. I’ve had multiple illnesses since then, and I use a walker, but I still teach theology at the University of Dallas and to our novices. 
 OSV: What memories do you have of growing up in Hungary? 
 Father Farkasfalvy: I grew up during war, which is the worst time to grow up. My hometown is Székesfehérvár, about 50 miles outside of Budapest. It was bombed to little pieces. 
 My parents were wealthy people and prominent in the community. But, they lost nearly everything during the war. And, when the Soviet regime came, what little we had left was taken away. Between the ages of 12 and 20, I experienced real poverty. I didn’t realize it at the time, because everyone else was in the same situation. 
 The Soviets persecuted my parents for political and religious reasons. So, we moved to Budapest to try and disappear into the crowd. I became acquainted with religious orders, and the more religion was persecuted by the communists, the more I was attracted to religious life. 
 I entered the Cistercian monastery in 1954, but soon after it was suppressed. I made my novitiate in secret, as it was illegal to be a novice. Had I been discovered, I could have been arrested. After I left Hungary for Rome, my novice master and many others in my order went to prison. 
 In 1956, during the Hungarian revolution, my superiors suggested I leave for Rome. The plan was to return in five to 10 years, when the regime had collapsed. But that didn’t happen for another 34 years. 
 When I finished my studies in Rome, my superiors told me to go to Texas. It was difficult being dislocated, but eventually I was happy working as a math teacher. 
 OSV: How did you hide from the authorities when you lived in communist Hungary? 
 Father Farkasfalvy: The idea was to have an identity, a legal occupation, as a layperson. I was a student in law school. I wanted to study French, but in the Hungarian system at the time it didn’t matter what you wanted to study. I was given the choice of going to law school or into the military. I chose law school. I found studying law easy, and it gave me the opportunity to secretly get the training and instruction I needed for religious life. 
 OSV: How has the situation of the Church improved in Hungary today? 
 Father Farkasfalvy: The Church today enjoys unhindered freedom, but is very poor and supported by the government. The prime minister, Viktor Orbán, is a Protestant, but [he] is on the side of the Church’s efforts to evangelize. The Church in Hungary has had a whole generation that has grown up without the Faith, and it will take decades for things to be restored. We’ve already seen the Church have a short period of blossoming, however. 
 OSV: Our Lady of Dallas, your community in Texas, has done well for vocations at a time when many other communities have not. How have you been successful? 
 Father Farkasfalvy: During my first 12 years as abbot, vocations were a struggle. In 2002, however, we started welcoming novices of good quality. They were young and enthusiastic, with a deep faith. The years following, they streamed into the monastery; 17 have now been ordained priests. 
 I think it took a dying out of our older Hungarians which paved the way for their replacement by Americans. There are only three of us Hungarians left, and we are old and not participating in any significant work of the monastery. The average age of our community today is 35. 
 OSV: Do you have any other thoughts on Blessed John? 
 Father Farkasfalvy: This is the first time in the history of our congregation that the Holy Father has recognized one of our members. We’re 800 years old, and we hadn’t previously had anyone elevated to blessed or canonized. It is astonishing. I want my brothers here in the monastery, as well as all Catholics, to understand the gift of God that they were given in the life of Blessed John Brenner. 
 Related Posts 
 Recent attacks on priests and places of worship show the increased antagonism toward religion 
 VATICAN CITY (CNS) -- Violating religious freedom harms not only the individuals being persecuted, it… 
 Many people say that anti-Catholicism passed out of American politics when John F. Kennedy, a… 

 id="file23242783" filename="Blessed_Sacrament" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://religion.fandom.com/wiki/Blessed_Sacrament">
 Blessed Sacrament 
 The Blessed Sacrament, or the Body and Blood of Christ, is a devotional name used in the Roman Catholic Church, Old Catholic, Anglican, and Lutheran Churches, to refer to the Host and wine after they have been consecrated in the sacrament of the Eucharist. Christians in these traditions believe in the Real Presence of Jesus Christ in the Eucharistic elements of the bread and wine and hence practice Eucharistic reservation and Eucharistic adoration. This belief is based on interpretations of biblical scripture and tradition. In the Roman Catholic tradition, Christ's presence is believed to be corporeal, while in the Old Catholic and Anglican traditions, his presence is more usually seen as spiritual. The Roman Catholic understanding is defined by numerous church councils including the Fourth Lateran Council and the Council of Trent and is quoted in paragraph 1376 of the Catechism of the Catholic Church (which explains the meaning of Transubstantiation). 
 Contents 
 Roman Catholic Church 
 The Blessed Sacrament may be received by Catholics who have undergone the First Holy Communion (i.e., given by a priest or other Minister of the Eucharist to a Catholic and consumed by the communicant) as part of the Liturgy of the Eucharist during Mass. The person receiving the Eucharist should be in a "state of grace," i.e., have no mortal sin on their conscience at the time of communion (Matt 5:23-24). 
 The Blessed Sacrament can also be exposed (displayed) on an altar in a Monstrance. Rites involving the exposure of the Blessed Sacrament include Benediction and Eucharistic adoration. According to Catholic theology, adoration of the host is not the adoration of bread, but of the Body and Blood, Soul and Divinity of Christ, who is transubstantiated in it. Catholics know that Jesus is the sacrificial Lamb of God prefigured in the Old Testament Passover. Unless the flesh of that passover sacrificial lamb was consumed, the members of the household would not be saved from death. As the Passover was the Old Covenant, so the Eucharist became the New Covenant. (Matt 26:26-28), (Mark 14:22-24), (Luke 22: 19-20), and (John 6:48-58) 
 Anglican Communion 
 Reception of the Blessed Sacrament in the Anglican Communion varies by province. Formerly, Confirmation was universally required as a precondition to reception, but many provinces now allow all the baptised to partake, as long as they are in good standing with the Church and have previously received First Communion. 
 Devotions to the Blessed Sacrament vary. Individuals will genuflect or bow in the presence of the Blessed Sacrament, which is generally reserved in a tabernacle or aumbry on, behind, or near the altar. Its presence is usually indicated by a lamp suspended over or placed near the tabernacle or aumbry. Except among Anglo-Catholics, the use of a monstrance is rare, perhaps in keeping with Article XXV of the Thirty-Nine Articles that "the Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried about, but that we should duly use Them." Nonetheless, many parishes do have services of devotions to the Blessed Sacrament, in which the ciborium is removed from the tabernacle or aumbry and hymns, prayers, psalms, and sentences of devotion are sung or read. In some parishes, when the Blessed Sacrament is moved between tabernacles (say, from the High Altar to a chapel altar), sanctus bells are rung and all who are present kneel. 
 Lutheran Church 
 In most Lutheran churches, a person must have had catechetical training prior to a First Communion (or have received Confirmation in the Lutheran Church) to receive the Eucharist. Recently, more liberal churches allow all who are baptized to received it. Similar to the Anglican teaching, Lutherans are also taught to genuflect or bow in the presence of the Blessed Sacrament, which is normally located on an altar. In the Lutheran churches that still celebrate the Corpus Christi, like the Roman Catholic Church, a Monstrance is used to display the Blessed Sacrament during the Benediction. 

 id="file23242544" filename="blessed-salt" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.catholicsacramentals.org/blessed-salt">
 contact us 
 Use the form on the right to contact us. 
 You can edit the text in this area, and change where the contact form on the right submits to, by entering edit mode using the modes on the bottom right. 
 "'Spiritual combat' is another element of life which needs to be taught anew and proposed once more to all Christians today. It is a secret and interior art, an invisible struggle in which we engage every day against the temptations, the evil suggestions that the demon tries to plant in our hearts." Saint John Paul II 
 CatholicSacramentals.org is your online source for information on the sacramentals of the Catholic Church, specifically the Crucifix, Holy Rosary, Brown Scapular, Saint Benedict Medal, Miraculous Medal (Medal of the Immaculate Conception), Holy Water, Blessed Oil, Blessed Salt and Statues. Our online shop provides heirloom quality items for sale hoping to foster devotion to the power of the Church's sacramentals. 
 Although we have stressed the truth that the sacramentals derive their efficacy chiefly from the intercessory power of the Church, we may not minimize the role played by man's own subjective dispositions. The sacraments, too, for that matter, demand something of the individual recipient--at the very least that the subject place no obstacle in the way of grace. But in the case of the sacramentals man's cooperation has a very large part to play if they are to attain their full purpose. Their function is to provide an atmosphere in which the virtue of religion can thrive, and to produce a psychological reaction in man, to raise his thoughts and aspirations out of the realm of the profane and up to the realm of the sacred, to fix his heart on the things of the spirit, to impress on his consciousness God's will for him and God's providence always hovering over him. 
 Blessed Salt 
 There is a renewed interest today in the ancient sacramental of blessed salt, especially by charismatics, in healing and deliverance situations, etc. To understand its proper use and its efficacy, it would be helpful to review the Scriptural symbolism and its history, since Vatican II urges us to participate “intelligently and actively  in the use of sacramentals, just as in the use of Sacraments. 
 Salt in the ancient world was a precious commodity (even monopolized by the royalty in Egypt and Persia). Roman soldiers were partially paid with packets of salt (“sal  in Latin); this was the origin of our word “salary  and of phrases like “worth his salt,  etc. Being costly, it was an appropriate offering to God as a “covenant of salt  (Lev. 2: 13; II Chron. 13:5; Num. 18:19) used in sacrifices by the Isrealites (Ezek. 43:24) and for the accompanying sacrificial meal (Gen. 31:54). 
 Belief in its preservative and healing properties led to its use to dry and harden the skin of newborns (Ezek. 16:4) and to prevent umbilical cord infection. Used for 3500 years to preserve meats from deterioration, it became a symbol of preservation and spiritual incorruptibility that was to characterize anyone offering sacrificial worship. Shared at the sacrificial meal, salt became a symbol of friendship and hospitality, a custom-symbol still used today in Arab culture. 
 Jesus referred to this salt-symbolized friendship covenant in Mark 9:50: “Have salt in yourselves and be at peace with one another –that is, “preserve that quality (flavor) that makes you a blessing to one another.  (Note the double symbol of preservation and flavoring.) 
 This double primary symbolization is also found in Paul’s advice in Col. 4:6: Let your conversation be always full of grace, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how to answer everyone.  That is, let it be wholesome and savory, preserved from the corrupting conversation of worldlings (3:8 and Eph 4:29). (His use of the word salt may also have referred to another of its symbols: spiritual wisdom, since the Latin word for savor or taste, “sapientia , is the same as for wisdom.) 
 Some or all of these symbols may have been implied in Jesus’ words to his chosen ones, describing them as the “salt of the earth  (Matt. 5:13). He especially indicated that they were to oppose the world’s corruption, reminding them that, as salt must preserve its own anti-corruptive quality, they too must preserve their anti-corruptive influence in a sin-corrupted world. (See Luke 14:34). 
 The blessing promised by God on food and water, as well as the prevention of miscarriages and agricultural catastrophes (Exod. 23:25-26) was extended by God through Elisha in Jericho (II Kings 2:20-21), when he was inspired to put salt into the contaminated water. Adding salt to already brackish water to decontaminate it, made the miracle all the more impressive, since one would expect the opposite effect. This first miracle of Elisha is the primary Scriptural basis for the sacramental use of blessed salt today, as the Roman Ritual indicates. 
 As a Catholic sacramental, salt blessed by the liturgical prayer of a priest may be used by itself, unmixed, as in exorcisms, and [formerly in the exorcistic prayer at baptism]**, or it may be mixed with water to make holy water, as the Ritual prescribes (reminiscent of Elisha’s miracle). In whichever form, it is intended to be an instrument of grace to preserve one from the corruption of evil occurring as sin, sickness, demonic influence, etc. 
 As in the case of all sacramentals, its power comes not from the sign itself, but by means of the Church’s official (liturgical, not private) prayer of blessing–a power the Church derives from Christ himself (see Matt. 16:19 and 18:18). As the Vatican II document on the Liturgy states (art. 61), both Sacraments and sacramentals sanctify us, not of themselves, but by power flowing from the redemptive act of Jesus, elicited by the Church’s intercession to be directed through those external signs and elements. Hence sacramentals like blessed salt, holy water, medals, etc. are not to be used superstitiously as having self-contained power, but as “focus-points  funneling one’s faith toward Jesus, just as a flag is used as a “focus-point  of patriotism, or as handkerchiefs were used to focus faith for healing and deliverance by Paul (Acts 19:12). 
 Thus used non-superstitiously, modest amounts of salt may be sprinkled in one’s bedroom, or across thresholds to prevent burglary, in cars for safety, etc. A few grains in drinking water or used in cooking or as food seasoning often bring astonishing spiritual and physical benefits, as I have personally witnessed many times. As with the use of Sacraments, much depends on the faith and devotion of the person using salt or any sacramental. This faith must be Jesus-centered, as was the faith of the blind man in John 9; he had faith in Jesus, not in the mud and spittle used by Jesus to heal him. 
 In light of this, we can see why Vatican II states that “there is hardly any proper use of material things which cannot thus be directed toward the sanctification of persons and the praise of God.  (art. 61 of Liturgy document). Hence new sacramentals may also be added when rituals are revised (art. 79). Blessed salt is certainly not a new sacramental, but the Holy Spirit seems to be leading many to a new interest in its remarkable power as an instrument of grace and healing. 
 Any amount of salt may be presented to a priest for his blessing, using the following official prayer from the Roman Ritual: 
 “Almighty God, we ask you to bless this salt, as once you blessed the salt scattered over the water by the prophet Elisha. Wherever this salt (and water) is sprinkled, drive away the power of evil, and protect us always by the presence of your Holy Spirit. Grant this through Christ our Lord. Amen.  
 by Rev. John H. Hampsch C.M.F. 
 ** The old rite of baptism remains a valid form that can be used by a Catholic priest or deacon. Parents and God parents should prayerfully consider the old rite of baptism (in Latin or English) as it contains powerful blessings that are not present in the current rite. One can politely ask their priest or deacon to use the old rite. Please see the rubrics of the old rite here. 

 id="file23242561" filename="blessed-to-be-a-blessing" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://practicaltheologytoday.com/tag/blessed-to-be-a-blessing/">
 Tag: Blessed to be a blessing 
 That’s how long my mom, Gloria Hinkle, lived on this earth before passing into Eternity on June 9, 2021. I was privileged to give the Meditation at her Memorial Service. This is what I shared with friends and family… 
 What does one say when privileged to speak at his 95-year-old mom’s memorial service? Frankly, it’s something I’ve pondered over the past several years, knowing such an opportunity might present itself. Every time I would think about it, I honestly came up blank. Knowing that our creative juices get going under deadline, I posed a question to my mom. Shortly after she turned 95, I asked her what her target completion date was. Mom just grinned and said emphatically, “well, not 100!  Turns out that her target completion date was 95 years, 262 days. 
 There was one theme that kept running through the minds of my siblings, spouses, and me as we shared with friends and extended family the events of the last week of mom’s life. It was present again last night at the visitation. That theme was an overwhelming sense of blessing. 
 More than wondering what I might say at my mom’s memorial service, I wondered what the last days of her long-lived life might look like. It was an absolute blessing that mom’s mind was sharp to the very end. It was an absolute blessing that she did not suffer or linger in a vegetative state. She died peacefully, a week after a minor stroke – truly a blessing. 
 Last Friday, a week ago yesterday, mom was able to leave the hospital to return to Guardian Angels Care Center, which has been her home for the past four years. When she left Mercy, there was a sense that, with some therapy, she might be able to live for quite some time and be able to communicate adequately. But mom’s target completion date wasn’t 100. 
 Looking back, we suspect she used all of her remaining energy to get back home to the Care Center, to be among those who had cared for her these past years, to be with those who were an absolute blessing to her. To any Guardian Angels representatives among us today, please know what a blessing you have been to her and to us, her family – especially during a pandemic. 
 The concept of blessing is foundational to our faith and is dispersed throughout the Bible, both the Hebrew Scriptures and the New Testament. Many Psalms include phrases like, “Bless the Lord, O my soul.  We are quite familiar with the benediction that begins with, “May the Lord bless you and keep you…  In his Sermon on the Mount, in the part we know as The Beatitudes, Jesus described those who are blessed in God’s economy – the poor, the hungry, those who mourn, etc. In that same Sermon he also told his followers to bless those who curse them. 
 Several years ago I was contemplating the fact that in the Old Testament, blessings seemed to be a two-way affair – God blessing humanity and people blessing God. As I started to look at occurrences of the word “bless  in the Old Testament, I discovered that God was the original “blesser … 
 After the creation, God blessed Adam and Eve 
 After the creation, God also blessed the Sabbath 
 After the flood, God blessed Noah in a similar fashion as he blessed Adam and Eve 
 Noah, then in turn, responded with, “Blessed be the Lord,  the first example of humanity blessing God 
 On the surface, it kinda sounds like a mutual admiration society – God and humans blessing each other. I figured there must be more to it than mutual admiration. Being a dabbler in Hebrew (the operative word is “dabbler ), I decided to see what I could uncover about this word bless. This is what I discovered – the basic Hebrew word for bless is barak. Barak is the word for “knee  and implies kneeling. 
 This makes some sense. Throughout history, one approached royalty on bended knee – out of reverence, out of respect, out of humility. In Philippians 2, we read “that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow  – bended knee. So we bless God with great reverence, literally and figuratively, on bended knee. 
 So, blessing God makes sense but what of God blessing us? What does that look like? What immediately comes to my mind is the story of Jesus washing his disciples’ feet. During his last Passover meal with his disciples (which we know as the Last Supper) we read… 
 “Having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them to the end…Jesus knew that the Father had put all things under his power, and that he had come from God and was returning to God; so he got up from the meal, took off his outer clothing, and wrapped a towel around his waist…and began to wash his disciples’ feet.  
 Picture this! Jesus knew full well who he was as God incarnate – that all power and authority had been given to him. This Jesus showed the full extent of his love and began to wash his disciples’ feet, presumably on his knees. Picture it! The God of the universe, the Lord of lords, the King of kings on his knees, serving his own creation! What a picture of blessing! And what a picture of servitude! 
 Jesus was simply fulfilling and living out God’s vocational call of Abraham a few thousand years before. God told Abraham he would bless him and his descendants so they, in turn, could be a blessing to the rest of the world. The task of the Israelites in God’s kingdom project was to simply bless those around them as they were blessed by God. Pretty simple, pretty straight forward, and pretty clear. They were blessed to be a blessing. 
 When he washed his disciples’ feet, Jesus modeled for his followers what he wanted them to be about – blessing others by serving them. Makes me think of the two great commandments – Love God, love (or bless?) others. How can we love others? By blessing them, by serving them. 
 Looking back, I think that our mom understood the “blessed to be a blessing  concept more than we may have realized. Over the years, she quietly served those around her – often from her kitchen. On dairy farms in the mid-20th century, the role of the housewife was to serve the workers of the farm, which involved more than just meals. Clean clothes miraculously showed up in our drawers. As did patched jeans. Mom’s quiet servitude was a blessing to all of us. 
 That blessing, that quiet servitude, spilled over to those around her – to her neighbors, to her church, to her community (I believe mom was a charter member of the CAER board, the Elk River, MN, food shelf). And it spilled into Guardian Angels Care Center four years ago. We know she was a blessing to many there because the staff told us as much. One small example of mom blessing the staff at the Care Center: She weekly served the activities staff, setting up for Thursday Bingo. (It was important for us to plan our visits with her as to not conflict with her weekly job.) 
 Blessed to be a blessing. What a amazing concept! God ordained the idea with Abraham. Jesus fulfilled it and passed it onto his followers. As a follower, Gloria Hinkle quietly lived it out. What might our world look like of we all took to heart our God-given vocation to simply be a blessing to those around us? God, help us do exactly that! Amen. 

 id="file23242601" filename="blessed-to-be-a-blessing-a-sermon-on-genesis-121-9" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.stevethomason.net/2014/09/18/blessed-to-be-a-blessing-a-sermon-on-genesis-121-9/">
 Blessed to Be a Blessing | A Sermon on Genesis 12:1-9 
 I want to start off today with a really difficult question. Why did God choose Abraham? Is God into playing favorites? 
 Let’s think about it. Last week we talked about Noah’s family and the flood and how God made a promise to all flesh on earth. This was a cosmic story and a cosmic promise. It was obvious in that story that God’s desire was to redeem the whole earth and all life in it. 
 So, why not just go with that? Why not just bless everybody, all the time? 
 Now, here in Genesis chapter 12, we see that God singles out one man from a city named Ur, way out in the country of Chaldea, and blesses him. 
 One guy. 
 Yes, there are obvious lessons we can learn from this story. It’s an incredible story. God told Abraham to go, and didn’t tell him where he was going. That means God called Abraham into the unknown. Then God said, “I will make you a great nation.  But, Abraham’s wife, Sarah, was barren. She couldn’t have children. So, God called Abraham to believe the impossible. 
 That is still how God’s call works today. 
 God calls us into the unknown future and asks us to believe the impossible, that broken people can be restored, that the dead will rise, and that there will be peace on earth. 
 We could just end there and we would feel challenged. 
 But, I’m still plagued by this bigger question. Why choose Abraham? 
 Why would God do that? We know where this leads, don’t we? Any time one group of people believe that they are the “chosen ones  of God it leads to trouble. They can start telling themselves things like: God loves us more than God loves everyone else. God loves us and hates everyone else. God chose us because we are better than everyone else, and we deserve it. Everyone else deserves to be condemned and mistreated. We are “in  and everyone else is “out  and you must become one of us to be right with God. 
 And then different groups claim to be God’s chosen ones and they draw battle lines. 
 We’ve seen this kind of thinking repeated over and over throughout history. It has led to violence, war, poverty, sickness, and death. 
 So, again, why would God single out one guy and set up humanity for this kind of exclusivism? 
 Well, there are two basic options. Either (a) God is really into exclusivism, superiority, and violence, or (b) for there is some kind of necessity for God to choose one person. 
 If we believe that Jesus is the revelation of God in the flesh, and to truly understand God, we need to understand Jesus, then it is impossible for us to believe that it is option (a). Jesus taught us to love others, to think of others as better than ourselves, to reach across the boundaries of exclusivity. 
 So, if it isn’t a, then there must be some reason. 
 Let’s do a little experiment. I want you to think about God for a moment. Close your eyes and imagine God. What comes to your mind? 
 There are hundreds of ideas and images that were just generated in this room right now. I’m sure that they, if we could flash each one of them up on the screen they would be radically different from each other. 
 There is one thing that I guarantee they all have in common, though. They are all wrong. 
 They aren’t completely wrong. That’s not what I’m saying. They are all wrong in the sense that none of them could possibly be THE picture of God. 
 Think about it. God is infinite. God is the creator of all things, therefore God is not a thing. There is no thing in existence that could possibly, accurately represent God. Therefore, that thing, even if it was a noble idea, like love, is pitifully unable to describe God. 
 One theologian, named Augustine, said, “If you can explain it, it isn’t God.  
 So, Steve, what you’re telling us is that it is impossible to know God. 
 Well, yes and no. 
 Let’s do another experiment. 
 Let’s say that I stand before you all today and declare my love for you. “I love you all  “Be warm and well fed.  “I want the best for you, and I will do all I can to help you thrive in life.  
 Do you believe me? You may or may not believe me. What have I done? I’ve spoken words into the air. That’s it. 
 What would happen if I did this. Here I have a bag of rocks. What if I brought this bag of rocks to you and said, “Jason, these rocks represent my love for you and your family and my promise to do everything in my power to help your family grow in your faith. Take this rock as a symbol of my blessing upon your life and my commitment to you. Whenever you look at this rock, remember this vow that I have made to you today.  
 And then if I came over to you and said those things to you. These rocks are a symbol of my promise to you. 
 And to you, these rocks are a symbol of my promise to you. 
 And to you, these rocks are a symbol of my promise to you. 
 And to you, these rocks are a symbol of my promise to you. 
 The first thing you might think is, That’s kinda weird. Why would you give a rock? 
 Good point. Just go with it. 
 Let me ask you a question. Is the rock my promise? No. Is the rock me? No. Although I have been accused of having rocks in my head. 
 No, these rocks are just rocks. However, by me physically giving the rock to each of you and speaking my promise over the rock, the rock now has meaning. You can hold the rock in your hand. In some sense, the rock gives weight and substance to my promises to you. 
 Now, I want to expand this experiment. Each of you to whom I gave a bag of rocks, I invite you to find two other people in this room, right now. God to that person and say, “the promise given to me, I give to you.  and hand them one rock. 
 Go do that now. Seriously, go. Say, “the promise that I have been given, I give to you.  
 [let that happen] 
 Notice what happened. When I spoke a general promise to everybody, it was real. Everybody heard it. But, my guess is that it had very little impact. 
 But, when I singled out one person and placed a solid object in his hand, suddenly the promise took on a completely different dimension. It was personal. It felt more tangible. It had something physical attached to it. 
 But, in order for me to make the promise like that, I had to single out one person. By choosing one person I automatically eliminated everybody else. 
 Did I really, though? My promise to everyone still stands, but what must happen for everyone in the room to experience the promise in the same way that Jason did? It has to be shared. 
 That’s why God had to choose Abraham. 
 Notice what God said to Abraham. He said, I will bless you, so that all the nations will be blessed through you. 
 Abraham, you are blessed to be a blessing. 
 I didn’t choose you because I love you more than everyone else. I didn’t choose you because I want everyone to become just like you and I won’t love them if they don’t. I didn’t choose you so that you could create a member’s only club. 
 I chose you because people can’t wrap their minds around me as me. People need something physical in order to know me. I have to work with you so that I can work through you. I give you this blessing so that you can share this blessing with the world. 
 And that is our calling today. We will see throughout this year that God worked with and through Abraham’s descendants—the nation of Israel—as a physical symbol of God’s blessing for the world. And then Jesus came, a Jewish man, from the family of Abraham, as God in the flesh, to be the ultimate physical symbol of God’s love and blessing for the whole world. 
 And we, as followers of Jesus, are called, just like Abraham, to be a blessing to the nations. We are blessed to be a blessing. 
 I want to look at one more thing in this passage. Notice what Abraham did after God blessed him. God told this man to move away from his homeland to a place he didn’t know, and promised that his old, barren wife would give him children. 
 Abraham believed God and went. And when he arrived at a place called Bethel, Abraham did what? He built an altar. He piled up a bunch of stones and called out the name of The Lord. 
 This pile of stones would serve as a memorial to Abraham and all his descendants about the promise that God had made to him. 
 Right now, I invite everyone who received a stone today to come up here with me. 
 Come on. come up here. 
 As this group stands up here, let’s transfer the meaning of these stones. These stones don’t represent my promise to you. They represent God’s promise to us. God has promised to redeem. God has promised to forgive, and to guide, and to be with us always. God has blessed us, not so that we can be the “in  group, but that we can share those promises with everyone we meet. 
 Let’s make an altar together and be reminded of God’s promise. 
 [build the altar] 
 Our theme this year is Blessed to Be a Blessing. Each week we will see a new sign of God’s promise and God’s blessing, and we will be challenged on how we are called, like Abraham, to be a blessing to the world. 
 Get My Posts in Your Inbox 
 Sign up to get an email every time I post. That happens 2-3 times per week. I write about the Bible, Spiritual Formation, Theology and Art. I'd also love to hear from you in the comments. 

 id="file23242600" filename="blessed-to-bless" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.sbc.edu.sg/blessed-to-bless/">
 Search 
 Blessed to Bless: 
 God's mission in Asia and beyond 
 18 October 2019 
 by Rev Dr Clement Chia 
 Dear friends and family of SBC! 
 Grace and peace be to you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
 Psalm 67 begins by saying, “May God be gracious to us and bless us and make his face shine on us, so that your ways may be known on earth, your salvation among all nations.  For the psalmist, the reason for asking God to bless his people is not for their own benefit, but in order that God’s salvation be made known among all nations. Indeed, I am thankful for this opportunity to share with you how God blesses SBC in order that his ways and his salvation may be made known in Asia and beyond. 
 People need the Lord 
 We live in a time when people are shaken and impacted by fast-moving and devastating events that have global impact beyond their control. Pollution and haze threaten the health of millions; terrorism, religious and political fanaticism threaten lives and security in society; trade war that eventually will lead to accelerating cost of living… We live in a time when traditional beliefs regarding the definition of marriage and family are now being challenged and taken as an outdated opinion in a pluralistic world. We live in a time where many people are suffering from tense and broken relationships with family and associates, as well as with people in the society at large (such as the civil unrest in Hong Kong), causing anxiety and depression, anger and rage, alienation and pain… 
 People need the Lord. They need sound theology based on solid biblical foundations to keep them anchored in the sea of rapid change and confusion. 
 God blesses SBC with faculty and staff who not only teach with words but with their lives, modelling to the students what it means to be faithful disciples of Christ. 
 God blesses SBC with the Schools of Theology Chinese and English, and the Advanced Studies programmes, to teach and engage in deeper biblical studies and theological reflections to counter the spiritual threats and the false teachings facing the Church and society in these “last days . Events such as the Mission Week and International Night on “Persecution and Perseverance  help us see the reality of the broken world and the urgency of SBC to live out our mission. SBC is also actively engaging in conversation with biblical and theological scholars regarding how the teachings of the Bible may serve as a beacon of light for human flourishing, especially in relation to the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act in Singapore and the LGBTQ movement here and beyond. 
 People need the Lord. Those who are suffering and broken need healing that can only come from our Lord Jesus Christ. God blesses SBC with the School of Counselling and the School of Church Music to train people in providing guidance for the spiritual and emotional health of the Church and society. The Counselling Week earlier this year addressing topics such as divorce and depression brought in around 1000 participants each day during the week. The Hymn Festival on the theme “Broken but Restored  acknowledges the brokenness of this world, yet through songs, Scriptures, and stories, people find hope of restoration in Christ. Participants of these events are not just locals, but many leaders fly in to Singapore from the surrounding region to participate in these events. 
 People need the Lord… and so God has blessed SBC with three new programmes to equip those in marketplace ministry. Working professionals are trained so that they will be able to integrate Christian faith with their mission and vocation. 
 People need the Lord… and He brought in 443 students from 27 countries for us to train. God continues to call more people into the harvest field, and a record high of 83 people joined our Open House last month, seeking God’s will for their vocation. 
 God continues to bless SBC still as He brings our ministry beyond Singapore through the Selah Retreats in Manila, Philippines and Surabaya, Indonesia. Music and worship ministry leaders, pastors and seminary educators saw the futility of growing churches defined by key performance indicators such as numbers, programme sprawl, and overactivity. Instead, they committed to realign their ministries to God’s kingdom agenda through intentional spiritual leadership and discipleship. 
 This past year, God blesses SBC as we provide lifelong learning and support for our alumni and pastors to promote ministry effectiveness. The Centre of Servant Leaders was launched last year. Pastors can hone ministry skills such as preaching, or find help in addressing issues such as suffering from renowned and seasoned practitioners. Early-career pastors are now being mentored by an experienced pastor through peer group sessions and retreats. 
 God also blesses SBC with you, through your prayer support, financial support, partnerships in events, and the sending of your church members to be trained or to serve at SBC. As the lyrics of the song written by Steve Green says, “People need the Lord… We are called to take His light to a world where wrong seems right. What could be too great a cost for sharing life with one who’s lost? Through His love our hearts can feel all the grief they bear. They must hear the words of life, only we can share.  Psalm 67 ends by saying, “God, our God, blesses us. May God bless us still, so that all the ends of the earth will fear him.  We look forward to your continuous support, such that when God blesses SBC through you, He will also bless the nations through SBC in Asia and beyond. 
 Our Mission 
 To glorify God by training faithful servants of Jesus Christ to edify the body of Christ and to make disciples of all nations 
 contact info 
 SINGAPORE BIBLE COLLEGE 9 – 15 Adam Road Singapore 289886 
 quick Links 
 newsletter 
 A quarterly newsletter that responds to socio-cultural challenges from a biblical worldview. 

 id="file23242706" filename="blesser" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.dictionary.com/browse/blesser">
 to consecrate or sanctify by a religious rite; make or pronounce holy. 
 to request of God the bestowal of divine favor on: Bless this house. 
 to bestow good of any kind upon: a nation blessed with peace. 
 to extol as holy; glorify: Bless the name of the Lord. 
 to protect or guard from evil (usually used as an interjection): Bless you! Bless your innocent little heart! 
 to condemn or curse: I'll be blessed if I can see your reasoning. Bless me if it isn't my old friend! 
 to make the sign of the cross over or upon: The Pope blessed the multitude. 
 SEE MORESEE LESS 
 OTHER WORDS FOR bless 
 In effect, this quiz will prove whether or not you have the skills to know the difference between “affect  and “effect.  
 Question 1 of 7 
 The rainy weather could not ________ my elated spirits on my graduation day. 
 Origin of bless 
 First recorded before 950; Middle English blessen, Old English blētsian, blēdsian “to consecrate  (originally done with blood), earlier *blōdisōian (blōd “blood  + -isō- derivational suffix + -ian verb suffix); see blood 
 OTHER WORDS FROM bless 
 blesser, nounbless·ing·ly, adverboutbless, verb (used with object), out·blessed or out·blest, out·bles·sing.pre·bless, verb (used with object) 
 Words related to bless 
 How to use bless in a sentence 
 I’m one of those who’s been blessed to have found such people, in the form of three notable, incredibly successful figures who have helped me build my own private equity career. 
 I have been blessed to call Dupont Circle my home for nearly a decade, watching it change and grow before my very own eyes. 
 Billy Joe Shaver would tell you he was blessed and charmed, but he also couldn’t hide that he knew he deserved better. 
 For now, though, Sander said, “Looking to other countries, it feels like being on an island of the blessed.  
 In fact, at Rome’s Olympic Stadium, the pope once knelt and was blessed by a gathering of thousands of Catholic charismatics, all speaking in tongues. 
 British Dictionary definitions for bless 
 bless 
 / (blɛs) / 
 verb blesses, blessing, blessed or blest (tr) 
 to consecrate or render holy, beneficial, or prosperous by means of a religious rite 
 to give honour or glory to (a person or thing) as divine or holy 
 to call upon God to protect; give a benediction to 
 to worship or adore (God); call or hold holy 
 (often passive) to grant happiness, health, or prosperity tothey were blessed with perfect peace 
 (usually passive) to endow with a talent, beauty, etcshe was blessed with an even temper 
 rare to protect against evil or harm 
 bless! (interjection) an exclamation of well-wishing 
 bless you! (interjection) 
 a traditional phrase said to a person who has just sneezed 
 an exclamation of well-wishing or surprise 
 bless me!, bless my soul! or God bless my soul! (interjection) an exclamation of surprise 
 not have a penny to bless oneself with to be desperately poor 
 SEE MORESEE LESS 
 Word Origin for bless 
 Old English blǣdsian to sprinkle with sacrificial blood; related to blōd blood 

 id="file23242583" filename="blesses" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.thefreedictionary.com/blesses">
 bless 
 bless 
 (blĕs) 
 tr.v. blessed or blest (blĕst), bless·ing, bless·es 
 1. To make holy by religious rite; sanctify: The clergy blessed the site for the new monastery. 
 2. To invoke divine favor upon: The bishop blessed the fishing fleet. 
 3. To make the sign of the cross over: She knelt and blessed herself. 
 4. To honor as holy; glorify: Bless the Lord. 
 5. To confer well-being or prosperity on: They were blessed with a baby girl. 
 6. To endow, as with talent: He was blessed with a photographic memory. 
 Idiom: 
 bless you 
 Used to wish good health to a person who has just sneezed. 
 [Middle English blessen, from Old English blētsian, to consecrate; see bhel- in Indo-European roots.] 
 bless′er n. 
 Word History: The verb bless comes from Old English blœ̄dsian, blēdsian, blētsian, "to bless, wish happiness, consecrate." Although the Old English verb has no cognates in any other Germanic language, it can be shown to derive from the Germanic noun *blōdan, "blood." Blœ̄dsian therefore originally meant "to consecrate with blood, sprinkle with blood." In many cultures, the blood of a sacrificed animal is thought to hallow and bring blessings upon the people and places that it touches. In the Biblical book of Exodus, for example, God punishes the Egyptians by killing the first-born son in every family, but the Israelites are able to protect their own houses from divine wrath by sprinkling the blood of a sacrificed lamb on their lintels and doorposts. The Angles, Saxons, and Jutes, the early Germanic migrants to Britain, would have originally used the verb blœ̄dsian for the consecrations effected by their own pagan sacrifices. After they converted to Christianity, however, blœ̄dsian acquired new meanings when it was used to translate the verb benedīcere, "to bless" in the Latin Bible. 
 bless 
 (blɛs) 
 vb (tr) , blesses, blessing, blessed or blest 
 1. (Ecclesiastical Terms) to consecrate or render holy, beneficial, or prosperous by means of a religious rite 
 2. (Ecclesiastical Terms) to give honour or glory to (a person or thing) as divine or holy 
 3. to call upon God to protect; give a benediction to 
 4. (Ecclesiastical Terms) to worship or adore (God); call or hold holy 
 5. (often passive) to grant happiness, health, or prosperity to: they were blessed with perfect peace. 
 6. (usually passive) to endow with a talent, beauty, etc: she was blessed with an even temper. 
 7. rare to protect against evil or harm 
 8. bless! (interjection) an exclamation of well-wishing 
 9. bless you! (interjection) 
 a. a traditional phrase said to a person who has just sneezed 
 b. an exclamation of well-wishing or surprise 
 10. bless me! bless my soul! God bless my soul! (interjection) an exclamation of surprise 
 11. not have a penny to bless oneself with to be desperately poor 
 [Old English blǣdsian to sprinkle with sacrificial blood; related to blōd blood] 
 bless - give a benediction to; "The dying man blessed his son" 
 anele, embrocate, inunct, oil, anoint - administer an oil or ointment to ; often in a religious ceremony of blessing 
 bestow, confer - present; "The university conferred a degree on its most famous former student, who never graduated"; "bestow an honor on someone" 
 3. 
 bless - make the sign of the cross over someone in order to call on God for protection; consecrate 
 gesticulate, gesture, motion - show, express or direct through movement; "He gestured his desire to leave" 
 reconsecrate - consecrate anew, as after a desecration 
 declare - state emphatically and authoritatively; "He declared that he needed more money to carry out the task he was charged with" 
 bless 
 [bles] VT 
 1. [God, priest] → bendecir God bless you! → ¡Dios te bendiga! God bless the Pope! → ¡Dios guarde al Papa! bless you! → ¡qué cielo eres!; (after sneezing) → ¡Jesús! and Paul, bless him or bless his heart, had no idea that → y Paul, el pobre, no tenía ni idea de que ... to bless o.s → santiguarse 
 2. (fig) they were never blessed with children → Dios jamás les dio la bendición de los hijos she is blessed with every virtue → la adornan mil virtudes I bless the day I bought it → bendigo el día que lo compré well I'm blessed!; God bless my soul! (o.f.) → ¡vaya por Dios! I'm blessed if I know (Brit) → no tengo ni idea 
 bless 
 to be blessed with [person] → être doué(e) de She is blessed with immense talent → Elle est douée d'un immense talent. to be blessed with a perfect climate [island, area] → jouir d'un climat parfait 
 bless 
 vt 
 (God, priest) → segnen; God bless (you) → behüt dich/euch Gott; God bless America → Gott schütze Amerika; bless you, my son → Gott segne dich, mein Sohn; did you buy that for me, bless you? (inf) → hast du das für mich gekauft? das ist aber lieb von dir! (inf); bless you, darling, you’re an angel (inf) → du bist wirklich lieb, du bist ein Engel (inf); bless your little cotton socks (inf) → du bist ja ein Schatz (inf); bless you! (to sneezer) → Gesundheit!; bless me! (inf) bless my soul! (inf) → du meine Güte! (inf); he’s lost it again, bless him (iro) → prima, er hat es wieder mal verloren! (iro); I’ll be blessed or blest if I’m going to do that! (inf) → das fällt mir ja nicht im Traum ein! (inf); well, I’ll be blessed! (inf) → so was! 
 to bless somebody with something → jdn mit etw segnen; to be blessed with → gesegnet sein mit 
 "During the service anyone wishing their pets to be blessed would bring them up to the altar area where the vicar blesses them. 
 Rev George Callander, of the Open Free Church in Durham, blesses the pets at Jesmond Dene in a special ceremony 
 "When the church blesses the marriage of anyone civilly married it does so recognizing that the couple is already married and that the blessing celebrates and deepens a reality that already exists." 
 and Isaac (27:37) believe that when one human blesses another he controls what is to come; that is, exercises magic. 
 HOLY DAY HOME: The Archbishop of Wales, Dr Barry Morgan, officially blesses the Llandaff Breakaway Caravan at Trecco Bay, Porthcawl 
 The Archbishop Of Wales Dr Barry Morgan blesses the caravan to be used by families and carers at Trecco Bay PICTURE: Andrew Davies [umlaut] 
 In Christ, God the Father "with every spiritual blessing" blesses Christians (Eph. 

 id="file23242513" filename="blessing" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://dailyverses.net/blessing">
 But blessed is the one who trusts in the Lord, whose confidence is in him. They will be like a tree planted by the water that sends out its roots by the stream. It does not fear when heat comes; its leaves are always green. It has no worries in a year of drought and never fails to bear fruit. 
 The Lord bless you and keep you; the Lord make his face shine on you and be gracious to you; the Lord turn his face toward you and give you peace. 
 For I know the plans I have for you, declares the Lord, plans to prosper you and not to harm you, plans to give you hope and a future. 
 And my God will meet all your needs according to the riches of his glory in Christ Jesus. 
 Worship the Lord your God, and his blessing will be on your food and water. I will take away sickness from among you. 
 For I command you today to love the Lord your God, to walk in obedience to him, and to keep his commands, decrees and laws; then you will live and increase, and the Lord your God will bless you in the land you are entering to possess. 
 The Lord is my shepherd, I lack nothing. He makes me lie down in green pastures, he leads me beside quiet waters. 
 Whoever gives heed to instruction prospers, and blessed is the one who trusts in the Lord. 
 How abundant are the good things that you have stored up for those who fear you, that you bestow in the sight of all, on those who take refuge in you. 
 But to you who are listening I say: Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you, bless those who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you. 
 Do not repay evil with evil or insult with insult. On the contrary, repay evil with blessing, because to this you were called so that you may inherit a blessing. 
 But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, forbearance, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness and self-control. Against such things there is no law. 
 If you fully obey the Lord your God and carefully follow all his commands I give you today, the Lord your God will set you high above all the nations on earth. 
 Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be filled. 
 Dear friend, I pray that you may enjoy good health and that all may go well with you, even as your soul is getting along well. 
 And God is able to bless you abundantly, so that in all things at all times, having all that you need, you will abound in every good work. 
 “Bring the whole tithe into the storehouse, that there may be food in my house. Test me in this,  says the Lord Almighty, “and see if I will not throw open the floodgates of heaven and pour out so much blessing that there will not be room enough to store it.  
 I give them eternal life, and they shall never perish; no one will snatch them out of my hand. My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all; no one can snatch them out of my Father’s hand. I and the Father are one. 
 Personal Bible reading plan 
 Create an account to configure your Bible reading plan and you will see your progress and the next chapter to read here! Read more... 

 id="file23242571" filename="blessing" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.theaterandtheology.com/blessing">
 Blessing was postponed because of Corona. Click here for details. 
 Sherri Mandell wrote a heartrending and hope-giving book in the year after her son Koby's murder. Todd Salovey's play brings that year searingly to life. 
 When Rabbi Seth Mandell approached me with the proposal that I direct Blessing, I was honored and intimidated in equal measure. Honored because it is important that this story be told; in its particular Israeli and Jewish context, and in its universal context of tragedy, bereavement, and resilience, this play is rich and deep. Intimidated because in order to honor and be faithful to the horror and the beauty of this personal history, entrusted to me by real people who courageously put their intimate grief and wounded hearts on display, I knew that I better get it right. 
 The play was written for one actor but we have added an ensemble of four skilled performers who limn the experience and emotions of the character of Sherri by creating scenes, and even set pieces and obstacles, with their bodies and voices in a powerful augmentation of the text. 
 ​ 
 I hope my audiences will leave the theater as saddened by the tragedy and as awed and inspired by the strength of Sherri Mandell's response as I am. 
 ​ 
 ~ Yael Valier, Creative Director, Theater and Theology, Jerusalem 
 ​ 
 ​ 
 With John Krug's extensive experience in production and lighting design and Shari Greenspan's creative props and stage management, Blessing is set to open for audiences on January 11th in Jerusalem and then go on to Modi'in, Ra'anana, Beit Shemesh and Gush Etzion. Performances will be followed by discussions on grief, faith, and doubt with Sherri Mandell, Rabbi Seth Mandell, Rabbi Natan Lopes Cardozo, Rabbi David Lapin, and Tanya White. Click here for dates and tickets. Scroll down or click here for cast, speaker, and crew bios. 
 ​ 
 The entire Blessing production process is being followed by a film crew from Holy Land Productions who are creating a documentary about the Mandells through the lens of the play. Stills from the production process below. Photos of the auditions are by Holy Land Productions. Photos of rehearsals are by Karen Feldman. (Photos that are obviously amateur snapshots are Yael's responsibility.) 
 ​ 
 For more information about Sherri Mandell and the Koby Mandell Foundation, including programs for bereaved families, camps for children bereaved by terror, support services, and the hugely successful annual Comedy for Koby event, click here. 
 Music 
 The Blessing of a Broken Heart is full of references to liturgy, biblical text, and Jewish mystical writings. Based on references and the overall messages of the play, Yael chose verses and asked Shifra Levy to compose original music for them. The play opens with the Shifra's music and vocals for 
 Isaiah 45:7: The fashioning of light and creation of darkness, the making of peace and creation of evil; I am God, the doer of all these things. 
 In the blessings that Jews make before saying the Shema prayer every day, they quote this verse -- with a change instituted by the Rabbis: [God is] the fashioner of light and the creator of darkness, the maker of peace and the creator of everything. 
 It seems that it is just too hard for us to say out loud that God creates evil. We don't deny it -- we say that "God creates everything" but we cannot make ourselves say that God creates evil. Yet, it seems that God does indeed do that. 
 The Blessing of a Broken Heart grapples with this realization in an honest and courageous way that paves a path toward acceptance? a defiant persistence? gratitude for the good? a determination to strengthen the light in the world? I'm not quite sure how to put it into words, and I suspect that the answer will be different for each audience member. 
 This is Shifra's Yotzer Or Uvoreh Choshech (He Fashions Light and Creates Darkness) 
 YOTZER OR - BLESSING 
 Audition and rehearsal photos 
 Dena Davies 
 Ensemble 
 A fashion designer by trade, Dena has designed costumes for over ten English- language Jerusalem community theater productions. She also joined the cast in a number of productions, including In The Heights, West Side Story, Cinderella, Singing in the Rain, Hairspray, and Second Star to the Left. Dena performed a monologue in Second Labor Live in both of its runs. She and her husband are the founders of CBDB productions. They are working on producing an original musical, Song of Solomon, which was already produced in the Philippines to great success. 
 Gillian Kay 
 Ensemble 
 Gillian is a regular in the Theater in the Rough Shakespeare troupe. Her roles have included Banquo/The Porter in Macbeth; Gremio in Taming of the Shrew; Gildenstern/The Gravedigger in Hamlet; and Worcester in Henry IV. She also played the title role in J-Town Playhouse's production of Irena's Vow, when she had to get used to acting indoors, in one place and not in iambic pentameter. She is excited and honoured to be part of The Blessings of a Broken Heart production, an opportunity to do something completely different. 
 Shifra Levy 
 Ensemble, Original Composition and Arrangements 
 Shifra was invested in acting and musical theater before she made aliyah in 2015. Since then, she has focused on music and film. Shifra is a singer-songwriter-musician who plays piano and ukulele. She composed original music for Tefilat Haderech (the traveler's prayer), Psalm 6, Psalm 19, Psalm 77, and Isaiah 45 for this production. Her latest collaborations include The Light That Lives On, with Sherri Mandell and Rena Ish Ran, and If I Found Grace with Yerachmiel Ziegler. Shifra currently releases music on independent platforms while studying film at Maale Film School. 
 Howard Metz 
 Ensemble 
 Howard trained at Circle in the Square Theatre School in NY and has been acting for decades in Jerusalem and Tel Aviv. Recent credits include Rabbi Schmidt in Theater and Theology's In a Stranger's Grave, Joe in Theater and Theology's Off the Derech Dolorosa, and Pablo in Theater and Theology’s Divine Right. Howard also recently appeared in Assassins, Avenue Q, and The 25th Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee. 
 Rebecca Sykes 
 Sherri Mandell 
 Rebecca is a Jerusalem-based actor and educator. Past performances include singing with L'Opera Français de New York in Lakmé, The Three Penny Opera (Mrs.Peachum), The Sound of Music (Baroness), Company (Joanne), Man of La Mancha (Aldonza), and Pippin (Leading Player). She created and performed the one-woman cabaret show The Antique Show based on her extravagant collection of vintage sheet music. Rebecca is also a founding member of Dal Vivo Theater Ensemble, Chicago’s maniacal red-nose clown troupe. She offers dynamic workshops rooted in yoga, theater, and text-study that build experience in values-based learning. 
 Playwright 
 Speakers 
 Todd Salovey 
 Playwright 
 Todd Salovey is in his third decade as Associate Artistic Director of San Diego Repertory Theatre and founding Artistic Director of the Lipinsky Family San Diego Jewish Arts Festival. His stage adaptation of Sherri Mandell’s memoir The Blessing of a Broken Heart was awarded an Edgerton New American Play Award in 2007, and was subsequently produced under Salovey’s direction at San Diego REP, Arizona Jewish Theatre, Los Angeles Jewish Women’s Theatre, and two tours for the Koby Mandell Foundation. His other stage adaptations include A Hammer a Bell and a Song to Sing (from the writing and music of Pete Seeger) and The Dybbuk for Hannah and Sam’s Wedding (from S. Ansky’s classic play) which were both produced under his direction at San Diego REP. Salovey is an award winning theatre director, and is on the faculty of the University of California San Diego in both the Department of Theatre and Dance and Rady School of Management. His great-grandfather was a pharmacist in Geula, and father was 3rd generation born in Jerusalem. 
 Speakers 
 Crew 
 R' Dr. Natan Lopes Cardozo 
 January 18, Modi'in 
 Rabbi Dr. Natan Lopes Cardozo, is the founder and dean of the David Cardozo Academy and Bet Midrash of Avraham Avinu in Jerusalem. A native of the Spanish-Portuguese Jewish community of Holland, Rabbi Cardozo holds a doctorate in philosophy and received rabbinic ordination from the Gateshead Talmudic College, subsequently studying at the Institute for Higher Rabbinical Studies and at the Mir Yeshiva. 
 A sought-after lecturer on the international stage for both Jewish and non-Jewish audiences, Cardozo is known for his original and often fearlessly controversial insights into Judaism. His ideas are widely debated in social media, blogs, books and other forums. 
 Rabbi Cardozo is the author of thirteen books and numerous articles in both English and Hebrew. He heads a Think Tank focused on finding new Halachic and philosophical approaches to religious issues facing the Jewish People and the State of Israel. 
 R' David Lapin 
 January 20, Ra'anana 
 After spearheading a religious movement in South Africa known for its vitality and its normality, and leading a community there, Rabbi Lapin moved to the USA and eventually made aliya. He is now the spiritual leader of Kehilat Bnei Aharon in Ra’anana, where he supports an ethos of open dialogue, continual learning and growth. Key to Rabbi Lapin's success has been the high credibility he enjoys and the respect he commands across the religious spectrum from Hareidi to non-Orthodox and non-Jewish. 
 During his time in South Africa, in collaboration with Nelson Mandela’s government, Rabbi Lapin drafted one of the world’s first formal codes of corporate ethics. Known as the Code of Ethics for the King Commission on Corporate Governance, it is still in practice today. 
 Rabbi Lapin went on to interact at a senior level with the SA government in matters concerning the intersection of economics and ethics. 
 To read more of Rabbi Lapin's thoughts on faith, tragedy, and God, you can go to rabbilapin.com and kbaraanana.com. 
 R' Seth Mandell 
 January 12, Jerusalem; January 23, Beit Shemesh and January 27, Gush Etzion 
 Rabbi Seth Mandell has been involved in Jewish education programs since 1982. He served as Director of the Hillel Foundation at the University of Maryland, and during that time, the Hillel program became one of the largest and most active Jewish college educational programs in North America. 
 Seth and his wife Sherri moved to Israel from the USA in 1996 because they loved Israel and wanted to put Judaism in the center of their lives and their children's lives. Their lives were devastated on May 8, 2001, when their 13 year old son Koby was murdered by terrorists. In Koby's memory, they created the Koby Mandell Foundation which provides healing programs for families struck by terrorism. Seth believes that the Jewish response to suffering is to live a fuller and more engaged life. The Koby Mandell Foundation helps others who have suffered the trauma of loss overcome the isolation that keeps them from returning to life. 
 Sherri Mandell 
 January 11, Jerusalem and January 27, Gush Etzion 
 Sherri Mandell is the author of Reaching for Comfort: What I Saw, What I Learned, and How I Blew It Training as a Pastoral Counselor (Ben Yehuda Press, 2021) which describes how she sought to heal from the pain of her sons' murder by volunteering on the cancer ward of a Jerusalem hospital. She won a National Jewish Book Award in 2004 for her spiritual memoir, The Blessing of a Broken Heart (Toby Press, 2003). Her book, The Road to Resilience: From Chaos to Celebration (Toby Press, 2015) details the spiritual stages of resilience. She's also published two children's picture books—The Upside Down Boy and the Israeli Prime Minister (Kar-Ben Copies) and The Elephant in the Sukkah (Kar-Ben Copies). 
 ​ 
 For the past twenty years, she and her husband have directed the Koby Mandell Foundation in Israel, named in honor of their son who was murdered by terrorists in 2001 when he was 13. She speaks around the world on grief and healing. 
 Tanya White 
 January 19, Ra'anana 
 Tanya White is an international lecturer, writer and educator with a focus on Tanach and contemporary Jewish thought. She is a graduate of the Matan Ayanot Scholars program and holds an MA in Jewish studies and philosophy from LSJS and SOAS London. She is currently pursuing a doctorate in Jewish Philosophy at Bar Ilan University. Tanya is driven by a passion to exchange insights on the most pressing topics facing the modern Jewish world. She has published numerous articles in books and on social media on these topics (see Tanya White, at The Blogs (timesofisrael.com). 
 ​ 
 Tanya has lectured in various settings on tragedy, grief, and the problem of evil. Notably, she believes that theodicy (trying to explain/justify evil) “may help us to live with the dissonance between the world as it is and the world as it ought to be…but ultimately it doesn’t heal our bleeding soul…  We will be discussing the nuances of this view. 
 Crew 
 Karen Feldman 
 Photography 
 Karen Feldman is an artist well-known in the Jerusalem English-speaking theater community for her stunning theater makeup and her astonishing and creative photography. Her artistic eye is in demand by all the JET companies. 
 Shari Greenspan 
 Stage and Props Management 
 Shari is a multi-talented visual artist and craftsperson who serves as the editor and art director of Flashlight Press, where she creates award-winning picture books. Her BA is in art and drama and she has created sets, props, and/or playbills for amateur productions of Dracula, Mame, The Sound of Music, The Miracle Worker, The Wizard of Oz, Esther and the Secrets in the King's Court, Joseph and the Technicolor Dreamcoat, and Aladdin among others. She also writes, directs, and creates sets and props for the annual Efrat Purim Spiel. They haven't won any Tonys yet, but they shoulda. 
 Johnny Krug 
 Production and Lighting Design 
 Rabbi Dr. John Krug was the assistant producer of the world’s longest running musical, The Fantasticks, from 1974 until its closing in January 2002. He served, for ten additional years, as the Production Consultant/Assistant Director for The Fantasticks' revival, until its closing in June 2017. In addition to more than 250 production credits in the past 49 years, as Director, Production Consultant, Set Designer or Lighting Designer, he has directed an award winning show for NBC and consulted for multiple Broadway productions and national touring companies. Johnny wrote his post-doctoral thesis on “The Use Of Drama And Theatrical Technique in Informal Jewish Education,  an often cited work. 
 Sheva Lipkind 
 Production Assistance 
 Sheva is a drama student at Emunah V’omanut in Jerusalem, where she studies Torah in the mornings and the arts in the afternoons. She showed an early flair for theater, directing her high school production in 2021. Sheva's courage, performance instincts, willingness to jump in in whatever capacity she is needed, and organizational skills make her an excellent production assistant. 
 Yael Valier 
 Direction 
 Yael has been involved in the Israeli English-speaking acting scene for eighteen years as a writer, actor, voice actor, and director. She is a graduate of Matan's Ayanot program and of the Ruti Tamir Physical Theater Workshop. Yael teaches drama to young adults at Midreshet Emuna V'Omanut, and to adults with special needs at Yachad and Midreshet Darkaynu. She runs Bibliodrama workshops for Jewish and non-Jewish groups and has taught the Bibliodrama method in various settings. Yael also works for several production companies in dubbing and narration, including the Fox Network's BabyTV Channel. You can hear her voice (though you may not recognize it) in five current animated BabyTV series. 

 id="file23242594" filename="blessing" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.ligonier.org/learn/articles/blessing/">
 Blessing 
 The Bible is a blessed book. It begins with blessing. It ends with blessing. It’s about blessing. Even more, it is a blessing. But all of this begs a question: what exactly do we mean by the word blessing? 
 Count Your Blessings 
 In everyday parlance, the word blessing reflects a range of meanings. We can count them one by one. So, for example, we might speak of bumping into a long-lost friend as an "unexpected blessing" or (depending on the friend) even as a "mixed blessing." Here the word more or less conveys the idea of personal gain and good fortune. But the term can also carry with it a sense of granting approval, as when a love-smitten lad asks for the "blessing" of a would-be father-in-law for his daughter’s hand in marriage. 
 Still further, we often think of blessing as connoting divine favor and protection; hence, nearly every presidential speech ends with those grandiose words: "God bless America." 
 I would suggest, however, that none of these uses of the term get to the bottom of blessing. Sure, the Bible likewise speaks of it in a multiplicity of ways. We thus read of blessing as the reward of a birthright (Gen. 27); the goodwill of one person to another (Gen. 33:11); the endowment of fatherly favor (Gen. 49:28); the privilege of serving God (Ex. 32:29); the receiving of an inheritance (Josh. 15:19); the benefit of a healthy crop (Lev. 25:21; Heb. 6:7–8); the bounty of creation (Ps. 65:9–13); and so on. 
 But even these blessed experiences need to be read against the wider backdrop of the Bible’s teaching on blessing. 
 From Whom All Blessings Flow 
 The word for blessing comes from a Hebrew noun (berakah) that is most often used to communicate the conferring of God’s covenant favor and goodness. Similarly, the verb form, "to bless" (barak), means, at root, "to kneel," but it is frequently used to describe the reverent worship of God’s covenant people, both in terms of prayer and praise. 
 But how are these Hebrew words related? Think of the difference between a benediction and a doxology. Both involve a distinct aspect of blessing. In a benediction we receive a blessing (berakah) from God (Num. 6:22–27). But in a doxology we exalt or bless (barak) God for His blessing (Ps. 103:1–5). In short, benediction begets doxology (Eph. 1:3–14). 
 The bestowal of divine blessing, therefore, points to an intimate relationship between a benevolent benefactor and his unworthy recipients. The former gives and graces, and the latter receives and rejoices, with blessing as the bond between them. God richly blesses us, and we in turn bless Him for His blessing. So we gladly sing, "Praise God from whom all blessings flow." 
 This, however, is only the nutsand- bolt s a spect of blessing. Throughout Scripture, the word is inextricably linked to four other biblical principles: creation, covenant, cursing, and Christ. In this context, blessing takes on a much richer, and more specific, meaning. 
 Fount of Every Blessing 
 The Bible opens with a pronouncement of blessing. In Genesis 1 we learn that the first benediction was spoken directly by God: He blessed creation on the fifth day, humanity on the sixth day, and the Sabbath on the seventh day. Life in paradise was lived under the full blessing of God. 
 In Genesis 3, however, God’s benediction became a malediction due to Adam’s sin. Thus, He cursed the Serpent, the woman, and Adam for their rebellion. As a result, humanity no longer lives under the umbrella of divine favor but under the hand of divine judgment. Sadly, the blessing that was enjoyed in paradise was lost as a result of the fall. 
 The rest of the Bible tells the unexpected story of how God’s blessing from creation is rediscovered by means of God’s gracious covenant. Hints of how this would be accomplished were given to Adam (Gen. 3:15), Noah (Gen. 9:1), Abraham (Gen. 12:1–3), Moses (Deut. 27–30), David (2 Sam. 7:28–29), and Ezekiel (Ezek. 34:25–26), among others. But the fount of God’s blessing is ultimately revealed in the Son of God incarnate. 
 In the New Testament, we discover the good news that Jesus turned God’s cursing into a blessing by becoming Himself a curse on the cross (Gal. 3:10–14). Those who trust in Christ are therefore gloriously forgiven and blessed both now and in eternity (Rom. 4:7–8); blessing lost is now blessing regained by the Lamb of God (Rev. 22). 
 Tragically yet justly, those who reject Him remain under God’s judgment and are cursed forever (John 3:36). 
 What, then, is God’s blessing? The answer is simple: Jesus Christ (Eph. 1:3). 

 id="file23242514" filename="Blessing" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blessing">
 Blessing 
 Rite that should bring persons or property share in divine power or grace 
 This article is about a type of religious pronouncement. For other uses, see Blessing (disambiguation). 
 The modern English language term bless likely derives from the 1225 term blessen, which developed from the Old English blǣdsian (preserved in the Northumbrian dialect around 950 AD).[1] The term also appears in other forms, such as blēdsian (before 830), blētsian from around 725 and blesian from around 1000, all meaning to make sacred or holy by a sacrificial custom in the Anglo-Saxon pagan period, originating in Germanic paganism; to mark with blood.[1] Due to this, the term is related to the term blōd, meaning blood.[1] References to this indigenous practice, Blót, exist in related Icelandic sources. 
 The modern meaning of the term may have been influenced in translations of the Bible into Old English during the process of Christianization to translate the Latin term benedīcere meaning to "speak well of", resulting in meanings such as to "praise" or "extol" or to speak of or to wish well.[1] 
 'To be blessed' means to be favored by God, the source of all blessing.[2] Blessings, therefore, are directly associated with, and are believed to come from, God. Thus, to express a blessing is like bestowing a wish on someone that they experience the favor of God, and to acknowledge God as the source of all blessing. 
 A biblical damnation, in its most formal sense, is a negative blessing. 
 In the Bible, positive and negative blessings are related; the book of Deuteronomy prescribes that obedience to the Law of Moses brings God's blessing. One of the first incidences of blessing in the Bible is in Genesis, 12:1–2 where Abram is ordered by the God to leave his country and is told: 
 Position in which a Jewish kohen places his hands and fingers during the Priestly Blessing, detail of a mozaic in the Synagoge of Enschede, Netherlands[3] 
 In Rabbinic Judaism, a blessing (or berakhah) is recited at a specified moment during a prayer, ceremony or other activity, especially before and after partaking of food. The function of blessings is to acknowledge God as the source of all blessing.[2] A berakhah of rabbinic origin typically starts with the words, "Blessed are You, Lord our God, King of the universe..." Rabbinic Judaism teaches that food ultimately is a gift of the one great Provider, God, and that to partake of food legitimately one should express gratitude to God by reciting the appropriate blessing of rabbinic origin prior, while torah mandates an informal blessing afterwards.[2] Jewish law does not reserve recitation of blessings to only a specific class of Jews; but it does mandate specific blessings to specific occasions, so that, for example since medieval times, Jewish women chiefly recite a rabbinic blessing after lighting two Shabbat candles. 
 In the Eastern Orthodox Church liturgical blessings are performed over people, objects, or are given at specific points during divine services. A priest or bishop usually blesses with his hand, but may use a blessing cross, candles, an icon, the Chalice or Gospel Book to bestow blessings, always making the Sign of the Cross therewith. When blessing with the hand, a priest uses his right hand, holding his fingers so that they form the Greek letters IC XC, the monogram of Jesus Christ. A bishop does the same, except he uses both hands, or may hold the crozier in his left hand, using both to make the Sign of the Cross. A bishop may also bless with special candlesticks known as the dikirion and trikirion. When blessing an object, the rubrics often instruct Orthodox bishops and priests to make use of such substances as incense and holy water. Also, formal ecclesiastical permission to undertake an action is referred to as a "blessing". The blessing may be bestowed by a bishop or priest, or by one's own spiritual father. When an Orthodox layperson bestows a blessing, he or she will hold the thumb and first two fingers of the right hand together (the same configuration used when making the Sign of the Cross on themselves), and make the sign of the cross over the person or object they are blessing. 
 In the Roman Catholic Church a priest or bishop blesses the faithful with the Blessed Sacrament in the monstrance during Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament. According to the guidelines given by the Vatican's Congregation for the Discipline of the Sacraments that govern the procedures for liturgical ceremonies, if a Roman Catholic layperson (a lay acolyte or parish administrator, for example) or any non-ordained religious (who is not the superior of the congregation) leads a Sunday service (other than a Mass, which requires a priest to celebrate), such as Eucharistic adoration, the Rosary, or celebration of the Liturgy of the Hours, he or she does not perform rites or sacraments reserved to the clergy and does not solemnly bless the people as a bishop, priest, or deacon would at the end of the service; an alternative format is used instead. 
 In the Lutheran Churches, priests are often asked to bless objects frequently used by or sacred to individuals, such as a cross necklace; in addition, Lutheran clergy also bless the homes of members of the congregations.[5] 
 Blessings in Islam have two aspects, according to major scholars of Islam. Blessings are given by Allah as a trial for mankind. Scholars of Islam believe that having fear of being gradually misled by blessings is an attribute of the pious, and not having fear from such even though one is constantly misbehaving is an attribute of the impious. Blessings can be a source of success in the afterlife if one is grateful to Allah for them and the same blessings can be a source for damnation in afterlife if a person is not constantly grateful to God for them.[7] 
 Islam has no clerical caste, and therefore no blessings reserved to specific individuals. Muslims will frequently pronounce "peace and blessings be upon him" when mentioning the name of Muhammad or indeed, any of the prophets. Muslims will also greet one another with a blessing every time they meet and depart: السلام عليكم ورحمة الله وبركاته as-salāmu alaikum wa rahmatul-lāhi wa barakātuh (meaning "may peace, mercy and blessings of God be upon you").[7] 
 In Hinduism Puja is a religious ritual performed by Hindus as an offering to various deities, distinguished persons, or special guests. It is modeled on the idea of giving a gift or offering to a deity or important person and receiving their approval ("Ashirvād"). During the Puja involves an 'Aarti plate' or 'Aarti lamp' is circulating around a deity or person and is generally accompanied by the singing of songs in praise of that deity or person (many versions exist). In doing so, the plate or lamp is supposed to acquire the power of the deity. The priest circulates the plate or lamp to all those present. They cup their down-turned hands over the flame and then raise their palms to their forehead - the purificatory blessing, passed from the deity's image to the flame, has now been passed to the devotee. 
 During the naivedya ritual, a devotee makes an offering of a material substance such as flowers, fruits, or sweets. The deity then 'enjoys' or tastes a bit of the offering, which is then temporarily known as bhogya. This now-divinely invested substance is called prasāda, and is received by the devotee to be ingested, worn, etc. It may be the same material that was originally offered, or material offered by others and then re-distributed to other devotees. In many temples, several kinds of prasada (e.g. nuts, sweets) are distributed to the devotees. 
 Hindu priest giving blessing. 
 Darshan is a term meaning "sight" (in the sense of an instance of seeing or beholding; from a root dṛś "to see"), vision, apparition, or glimpse. It is most commonly used for "visions of the divine," e.g., of a god or a very holy person or artifact. One could "receive darshana" of the deity in the temple, or from a great saintly person, such as a great guru. The touching of the feet (pranāma) is a show of respect and it is often an integral part of darshan. Children touch the feet of their family elders while people of all ages will bend to touch the feet of a great guru, murti (icon) of a Deva (God) (such as Rama or Krishna).[8] 
 There is a special link between worshipper and guru during pujas, in which people may touch the guru's feet in respect (Pranāma), or remove the dust from a guru's feet before touching their own head. 
 Another tradition is "Vāhan pujā" (Hindi) or "Vāgana poojai" (Tamil வாகன பூஜை) 'vehicle blessing'. This is a ritual that is performed when one purchases a new vehicle.[citation needed] 
 Replica of an image at the Sanchi gate at Chaitya Bhoomi, which shows a devotion scene involving a Buddhist stupa. 
 In Mangala Sutta, Lord Buddha describes 'blessings' that are wholesome personal pursuits or attainments, identified in a progressive manner from the mundane to the ultimate spiritual goal. 
 Clergy will normally receive a blessing from their ecclesiastical superiors to begin their ministry. In the Russian Orthodox Church pious laymen would go to a starets (elder) to receive his or her blessing before embarking upon any important work or making a major decision in their life. In the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, a member may receive a special blessing, known as a patriarchal blessing, as guidance. 
 In the U.S., there are sometimes ritual ceremonies to bless companion animals.[10] 
 In Hawaii anything new (a new building, a new stretch of road to be opened, a new garden) receives a blessing by a Hawaiian practitioner (or Kahuna) in a public ceremony (involving also the unwinding of e.g. a maile lei).[citation needed] 
 In Spanish, there is a blessing which can be used as a tender farewell, especially from a parent: Vaya con Dios ("Go with God"), also Adiós (A Dios, "to God"), similar to the French Adieu. 
 In the Kyrgyz people's tradition, the blessing (bata or ak bata, "the right blessing" or "white blessing") might be a good wish to somebody by the oldest person or the person with the best reputation before the travel or launch of some activity of the person who seeks such a blessing and moral support. The procedure might be from the pre-Islamic local nomadic traditions with deep family values. Sometimes, older person(s) might give a negative blessing (so called "teskeri bata" - "the opposite blessing" or "the black blessing").[11] 
 In commercial interactions, a seller's good words about the product, such as "I hope you enjoy it," could be considered to be blessings.[12] 
 ^ The mosaic text reads "בשמאלה עשר וכבוד" ("in her left hand riches and honor"), which is a part of Proverbs 3:16. 
 ^ Holak, Susan L. (2008-05-01). "Ritual blessings with companion animals". Journal of Business Research. Animal Companions, Consumption Experiences, and the Marketing of Pets: Transcending Boundaries in the Animal-Human Distinction. 61 (5): 534–541. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2007.07.026. 

 id="file23242515" filename="Blessing" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://project-jojo.fandom.com/wiki/Blessing">
 Blessing 
 Contents 
 What are Blessings? 
 A blessing is a sub-spec you can get for your stand, which, when it activates, will most of the time benefit you greatly. There are 13 different types of blessings you can get, and they are all good with specific Stands. Some of them, however, are great for all Stands. 
 How to Obtain 
 [1]A Holy Corpse Part, which you use to obtain a blessing. To get a blessing, you have to obtain a corpse part and select the option to bless your Stand. To obtain a corpse part, you must kill Diavolo. Spawns in Italy every 13 minutes 20 seconds with a 1/3 chance. It's 100% guaranteed to get a corpse part from killing Diavolo.==Information== Blessing doesn't stack with Ultimate sub-spec, meaning you can't have both at the same time. 
 If you 'fuse your Stand, the blessing is removed.' 
 [There are 2 options you can select while using Corpse Part.] 
 Option 1 - [Blessing] 
 When you choose blessing, you'll get a random blessing out of the 13 types of blessings. 
 Option 2 - [Re-roll Trait] 
 When you choose to re-roll a Trait, you'll get a random Trait out of the 18 types of Traits. 
 Type of Blessings 
 [Currently there is a total of 13 blessings] 
 [Holy] - All cooldowns are reduced by 30%, it even includes the sub-fusion move too. Doesn't effect some stands, such as Six Pistols firing speed or some moves, like 
 [Blessed] - Doubles the proc rate of sub effects, also gives 10% damage buff. 
 [Sanctified] - Caps all damage taken to 15% of your max health. 
 [Divine] - Chance to do a random "Critical Hit". [1/3] chance to proc and deals x2 more damage. 
 [Saintly] - Chance to inflict the Holy Flame. Proc Rate is based on the % of health you deal of your opponents health, that is why it procs more often against "Dummies". Saintly deals 10 tick damage of 0.4 to 0.9, 
 [Heavenly] - Chance to summon heaven orbs that fly at the target being damaged. Literally the same as "Saintly" but as a projectile. 
 [Angelic] - Bypasses every "block", "miss" and reflection. Replaces "normal damage" into "angelic dmg" which deals more damage and stuns. Angelic base buff is 1.07x but if it replaces your "attack", it's that times 1.5. 
 [Hallowed] - Kills now give healing over time and a 5% damage buff, this effect is stackable. 
 [Righteous] - Increases damage based on the missing health of the target. 
 [Anointed] - Outputted damage will always deal slight percentage damage to your opponent. 
 [Transcendent] - Buffed defense. Transcendent grants resistance to some stuns including hitstun. 
 [Almighty] - Increases defense based on the missing health of the player. The more endurance you have damage reduction effect increases . 
 [Exalted] - Reduces damage taken by 50% if the attacker is far away. "Far away" being like 3 meters 
 Re-rolling blessings 
 Blessings can be re-rolled by using DIO's Diary, which replaces the current blessing with a random one. 
 Categories 
 Community content is available under CC-BY-SA unless otherwise noted. 

 id="file23242614" filename="Blessing" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blessing">
 Blessing 
 A blessing is way to wish good luck for a person. Sometimes, in religious rituals, it is said the God blesses those who are good, or people can bless God. In Judaism, they bless God over wine. The priests can also bless religious objects in order to make them become holy. 
 The saying "bless you" is commonly used when someone sneezes. This is done because there is a tradition carried by the superstition that a person's soul will come out of their mouth and nose if they sneeze. People believed that saying "God bless you," or "bless you" for short, would make the soul go back inside. They are wishing the person good luck so that their soul is able to come back. [1] 
 People also think that if unusual good luck or a miracle comes to them, it is a blessing. For example, if some people wanted a child badly but are having difficulty conceiving, it could be considered a blessing from God if they end up having a child. 
 To give your blessing to someone is to give permission to them. For example, a man can ask his girlfriend's parents' for their blessing before he asks her to marry him. 
 Blessings are often thought of as the opposite of a curse. 

 id="file23242586" filename="blessing-a-business" parent_folder="corpus" url="http://anglicancompass.com/blessing-a-business/">
 How to Bless your Business 
 From time to time I get to do things that are just fun. Today is a day for that. I am traveling across town to bless a man’s business. I will arrive mid-morning and tour their small factory. Then he will gather all the employees together for a few minutes and turn it over to me. 
 I have put together a few thoughts (below). I want to do more than just ‘wing it’ with a prayer and a bible verse. And since I am an Anglican, I have a short liturgy. 🙂 
 Here is my thinking. 
 The Apostle Paul states that believers in Christ should have a new kind of life. His famous epistle, which is read every Easter Sunday (Colossians 3:1ff) elevates our heart and mind. The rest of our life and the way we live is changed; that is what he covers in the rest of chapter 3. His call to “do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him.  will allow me to speak directly to the employees. I will have a short meditation on this passage. 
 The prayers (below) are said in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. The Father is asked to bring the blessing over all things, the Son blesses the day to day work of our human labor, and the Spirit is asked to bring wisdom and insight that is so greatly needed in todays’ business environment. 
 The third part reads a little awkward…but I love it. I am going to ask the business owner offer this prayer. The values that he will charge his employees to uphold are the values that his company lists on their website. Perfect! 
 The people will respond with the statement from Psalm 90. 
 In this increasingly secular age, I consider it an honor to bring a Christ-centered blessing into the business world. Of course, not everyone at the company would be a Christian. I will be sensitive to that. But as Jesus entered the workforce and brought Good News to the marketplace, I think that every minister who can should go there too. 
 Share This! 
 Canon David has over 35 years of local congregational ministry, diocesan and national involvement, leadership, and ministry experience and is the founder of Leaderworks. He was the founding Rector/Pastor, Christ Church, Plano and currently serves as the Strategic Leader and Dean, Diocese of C4SO. 
 One Comment 
 Great post. I enjoy providing blessings for people as a way to show that the church cares about our everyday lives. Blessing businesses, homes, pets, cars and motorcycles, and so on, is just a simple way to bring the sacred into the secular, and care for people. 

 id="file23242711" filename="blessing-advent-wreath" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.usccb.org/prayers/blessing-advent-wreath">
 Blessing of an Advent Wreath 
 The use of the Advent Wreath is a traditional practice which has found its place in the Church as well as in the home. The blessing of an Advent Wreath takes place on the First Sunday of Advent or on the evening before the First Sunday of Advent. 
 When the blessing of the Advent Wreath is celebrated in the home, it is appropriate that it be blessed by a parent or another member of the family. 
 All make the sign of the cross as the leader says: 
 Our help is in the name of the Lord. Response (R/.) Who made heaven and earth. 
 Then the Scripture, Isaiah 9: (lines 1-2 and 5-6) or Isaiah 63 (lines 16-17 & 19) or Isaiah 64 (lines 2-7) is read: 
 Reader: The Word of the Lord. R/. Thanks be to God. 
 With hands joined, the leader says: 
 Lord our God, we praise you for your Son, Jesus Christ: he is Emmanuel, the hope of the peoples, he is the wisdom that teaches and guides us, he is the Savior of every nation. Lord God, let your blessing come upon us as we light the candles of this wreath. May the wreath and its light be a sign of Christ’s promise to bring us salvation. May he come quickly and not delay. We ask this through Christ our Lord. R/. Amen. 
 The blessing may conclude with a verse from “O Come, O Come, Emmanuel : 
 O come, desire of nations, bind in one the hearts of humankind; bid ev’ry sad division cease and be thyself our Prince of peace. Rejoice! Rejoice! Emmanuel shall come to thee, O Israel. 

 id="file23242519" filename="blessing-Bible.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.compellingtruth.org/blessing-Bible.html">
 What is the biblical definition of a blessing? What is it to bless in the Bible? 
 The word "bless" or "blessing" comes from the Old English word bledsian, based on the Old English word for blood. It may have originally meant "to consecrate with blood" and it was later used to translate the Latin word benedicere, which means "to praise, worship." The word "bless" is also used to translate the Hebrew word barak, which means "to praise, congratulate or salute." In the common vernacular, the word is used to indicate a wish of good fortune upon the one receiving the blessing. 
 Perhaps the meaning of the word blessing can be most accurately understood when these three etymological meanings—blood consecration, praise, and good fortune—are taken in concert. For example, in Genesis 12:1-3, God makes a promise to Abram, saying, "I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you and make your name great, so that you will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and him who dishonors you I will curse, and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed." God is promising good fortune, and a good future, to the descendants of Abram, and He is saying that others will gain good fortune through him. It can be said that all who believe in the God of Israel are consecrated with blood–the blood of Jesus Christ—through faith. The Hebrew word barak means literally "to kneel" and when used in this context, it indicates a relationship between man, who adores God by kneeling, and God, who benefits men with His presence. 
 Another word translated "blessing" is the Hebrew word esher, which indicates a state of happiness. This word occurs frequently in the Psalms and Proverbs. When the Psalmist says, "Blessed is the man who walks not in the counsel of the wicked, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of scoffers" (Psalm 1:1), he is saying "you will be happy if you do not walk in the counsel of the wicked, etc." Obedience to God is not a pre-requisite for salvation—while we were still sinners, Christ died for us (Romans 5:8)—but obedience to God and living according to His Word is a recipe for blessing, for happiness in life (Proverbs 3:1-4). 
 There are two Greek words in the New Testament which are translated as "blessing." The first is makarios, which carries the same meaning as the Hebrew word esher. The other is eulogeo, which is used to give a good report or say a good word; it is more similar to the meaning of barak. We bless God for all the blessings He gives us in Christ (Ephesians 1:3), and we are to bless those who mistreat us, because we were called to receive a blessing from God (1 Peter 3:9). The relationship of believers to God, our submission to Him and His gifts toward us, are described in terms of blessing, and indeed, there is no blessing as meaningful or as permanent as our inheritance in Christ (Galatians 3:18; 1 Peter 1:4). 

 id="file23242524" filename="blessing-Bible.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.gotquestions.org/blessing-Bible.html">
 Find Out 
 What is a blessing according to the Bible? 
 Answer 
 A blessing, according to Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, is “the act or words of one that blesses,  or “a thing conducive to happiness or welfare.  In the Bible, there are several words that are usually translated as “blessing  or “bless.  The Hebrew word most often translated “bless  is barak, which can mean to praise, congratulate, or salute, and is even used to mean a curse. Genesis 1:22 is the first occurrence, when God blessed the sea creatures and birds, telling them to be fruitful and multiply in the earth. Likewise, in verse 28, God gave the similar blessing to Adam and Eve, adding that they were to exercise dominion over creation. When God called Abram to go to the Promised Land (Genesis 12:1-3), He promised to bless him, make his name great, and through him, to bless all the families of the earth. The blessings here are plainly associated with happiness and welfare, both for Abram and others. In Genesis 22:16-18, God again blesses Abram, and adds that blessing is due to his obedience to God’s commands. 
 God is not the only one who pronounces blessings. When Rebekah left her family to become Isaac’s wife (Genesis 24:60), her family blessed her by saying “may you increase to thousands upon thousands; may your offspring possess the gates of their enemies.  When Isaac was ready to die, he pronounced this blessing on his son, Jacob: “May God give you of heaven’s dew and of earth’s richness— an abundance of grain and new wine. May nations serve you and peoples bow down to you. Be lord over your brothers, and may the sons of your mother bow down to you. May those who curse you be cursed and those who bless you be blessed  (Genesis 27:28-29). 
 Another Hebrew word for blessing is esher, which is also translated as happiness. Job 5:17 declares “Blessed is the man whom God corrects; so do not despise the discipline of the Almighty.  This blessing is connected to the knowledge that God is at work to direct us in the right path. God’s chastisement is actually a display of His love for us, like a parent who disciplines a child who plays in the middle of the street. Psalm 1:1-3 carries that theme further when it states, “Blessed is the man who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked or stand in the way of sinners or sit in the seat of mockers. But his delight is in the law of the LORD, and on his law he meditates day and night. He is like a tree planted by streams of water, which yields its fruit in season and whose leaf does not wither. Whatever he does prospers.  The book of Psalms is full of references to this kind of happy blessing for those who love and fear the Lord God. 
 In the New Testament, there are two primary Greek words translated as “blessing.  Makarios carries the meaning of happiness that we just looked at. The Beatitudes of Matthew 5 and Luke 6 describe the happy state of those who find their purpose and fulfillment in God. As in the Psalms, the best life is available for those who love and fear God and order their lives according to His Word. Romans 4:6-8 ties this happy blessing to those whose sins are forgiven, for they know the relationship to God has been restored. Eulogeo focuses more on good words or the good report that others give of someone and also describes the blessing that we say over our food (Matthew 26:26). This word is where we get our English word “eulogy,  in which we speak well of one who has passed away. Ephesians 1:3 blesses God for all the blessings that He gives us in Christ, and 1 Peter 3:9 instructs us to bless those who mistreat us, because we were called to receive a blessing from God. 
 Bringing these threads together, we see that a blessing is a statement of good will and happiness that is said about another, as well as the condition that fulfills those good words. God’s original design in creation was for His creatures, including mankind, to experience prosperity, peace, and fulfillment, but that design was ruined when sin entered the world. Statements of blessing are a wish for God to restore His favor on others or a declaration of His inherent goodness. The ultimate blessing that God has given is the new life and forgiveness that comes through faith in His Son, Jesus Christ. The material blessings we enjoy from day to day are temporary, but the spiritual blessings available to us in Christ encompass time and eternity, as well as material and immaterial things. As the Psalmist said, “Blessed is he whose help is the God of Jacob, whose hope is in the LORD his God  (Psalm 146:5). 

 id="file23242535" filename="blessing-for-a-golden-wedding-anniversary-traditional-rite.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://catholicism.org/blessing-for-a-golden-wedding-anniversary-traditional-rite.html">
 In late November, we were privileged to have in our chapel a High Mass for a couple’s fiftieth anniversary of marriage. It was a most edifying occasion, during which those gathered from near and far heard a beautiful sermon on the nature of matrimony, and the gift of perseverance in this day when marriage is so undermined by perversity and selfishness. Besides the traditional High Mass, there was a ritual of blessing at the beginning, and a sung Te Deum at the end, both of which we present below. The “Allocution  that begins the rite of blessing comes from the Weller edition of the Roman Ritual. Psalm 127 and the Te Deum were both chanted in Latin, as were certain of the other prayers of the ritual. Here, we present everything in English. 
 Allocution 
 Beloved of Christ: “Wedlock is a holy thing and it should be dealt with in a holy manner.  This is the teaching of the Council of Trent. Evidently you subscribe wholeheartedly to this solemn pronouncement, because you begin the festivities of your golden wedding anniversary in the house of God. You are come to render thanksgiving to Him for His benevolent favors of the past fifty years, and to entreat His benediction upon you for the years that remain. You return as devout pilgrims today to the altar of God, where in your youth you were made joyful and glad with the marriage sacrament. You were married in Christ, and the Lord has continued these many years to be your portion in happiness and your chalice in sorrow, just as you live in hope that He will bequeath an everlasting inheritance when the journey comes to an end. 
 On the day of your wedding, so long past, grace was laid up in your souls through the sacrament which you administered to each other. Today you stand before the world as a striking testimony of what God’s grace, conferred in matrimony, can effect in the husband and wife who will work along with the divine treasure that is in them. Our world has great need of the living sermon which your example of fidelity and loyalty dins into its ears. All who validly receive the sacrament of matrimony are meant to be sanctified and strengthened for the duties and for the dignity of their state, but sad to say not all use the powers of grace laid up in the soul by this sacrament. Because so many married folks have gone astray from the living God and turned to the false gods of their own inordinate whims and desires, we are confronted on all sides by the spectacle of overwhelming unhappiness and frustration that plagues our present society. Hatred between spouses, adultery, divorce, race suicide, unbridled selfishness, broken homes, forsaken children — these are the accursed fruits resulting when the grace of matrimony lies unused and its duties neglected. But now that we have mentioned these evils in protest and warning for the ears that can benefit from the Church’s solemn admonition, let us turn quickly from these unpleasant considerations, so offensive to the devout people of God, and instead take inspiration and courage from the lessons afforded by this happy occasion. 
 We are inclined to believe that you have lived the years of wedlock in imitation of the chaste nuptials of Christ with His Church, that your love for each other has resembled Christ’s love for His spotless Bride, and that as Christ is the Savior of the Church, so you have been to each other a savior, helping each other to grow in holiness and in true love for God and neighbor. Thus it has come about that now there is found in your marriage peace, dignity, happiness, and security. Of course, it is no secret that your way has not been easy at all times. You have had to endure suffering together. You have often been nailed to the cross of sacrifice. There have been temptations to overcome. You have been put to the test of heroic generosity and unselfishness, so that you might patiently bear each other’s weaknesses and imperfections. But because you have been subject to God, you have subdued the rebellion of the flesh. With God’s help you have been enabled to accomplish what of yourselves you would not have been able. 
 In the name of Christ, of the Church and all her children who are present, as well as in my priestly office, I extend heartiest congratulations to you and all good wishes for your future years together. Shortly we shall offer the Holy Sacrifice in praise and thanksgiving to our heavenly Father for the great work He has wrought in you. In the course of the Mass let us also beseech the Most High to be ever at your side in His full power and glory, assisting you to continue and to persevere unto the end, so that the wedlock kept holy on earth may adorn you for the hour in which the heavenly messenger comes to conduct you to the divine nuptials of the Lamb of God. 
 Blessing For Wedding Anniversaries 
 V. Our help is in the name of the Lord. R. Who made heaven and earth. V. O Lord, hear my prayer. V. And let my cry come unto Thee. R. The Lord be with you. V. And with thy spirit. 
 Let us pray 
 Direct, O Lord, we beseech Thee, our actions by Thy holy inspirations, and carry them on by Thy gracious assistance, that every prayer and work of ours may always begin from Thee, and by Thee be happily ended. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 
 Priest: N., do you renew and confirm your taking of N., here present for your wedded wife? 
 Husband: I do. 
 Priest: N., do you renew and confirm your taking of N., here present for your wedded husband? 
 Wife: I do. 
 May the blessing of almighty God, the Father, and the Son, + and the Holy Ghost, descend upon you and remain forever. R. Amen 
 Ant. Behold, thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord. 
 Psalm 127 
 Blessed are all they that fear the Lord: that walk in his ways. For thou shalt eat the labours of thy hands: blessed art thou, and it shall be well with thee. Thy wife as a fruitful vine, on the sides of thy house. Behold, thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord. May the Lord bless thee out of Sion: and mayest thou see the good things of Jerusalem all the days of thy life. And mayest thou see thy children’s children, peace upon Israel. Glory be… 
 Ant. Behold, thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord. 
 Lord, have mercy. Christ, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Our Father (silently as far as): V. And lead us not into temptation. R. But deliver us from evil. V. O Lord, hear my prayer. R. And let my cry come unto Thee. V. The Lord be with you. R. And with thy spirit. 
 Let us pray 
 Almighty, everlasting God, look with kindness on these your servants, who with gladness approach Thy holy temple to give thanks, and grant that, after this life they may, with their children, attain to the joys of eternal happiness. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 
 Te Deum 
 We praise Thee, O God: we acknowledge Thee to be the Lord. All the earth doth worship Thee and the Father everlasting. To Thee all Angels: to Thee the heavens and all the Powers therein. To Thee the Cherubim and Seraphim cry with unceasing voice: Holy, Holy, Holy: Lord God of Hosts. The heavens and the earth are full of the majesty of Thy glory. Thee the glorious choir of the Apostles. Thee the admirable company of the Prophets. Thee the white-robed army of Martyrs praise. Thee the Holy Church throughout all the world doth acknowledge. The Father of infinite Majesty. Thine adorable, true and only Son Also the Holy Ghost the Paraclete. Thou art the King of Glory, O Christ. Thou art the everlasting Son of the Father. Thou having taken upon Thee to deliver man didst not abhor the Virgin’s womb. Thou having overcome the sting of death didst open to believers the kingdom of heaven. Thou sittest at the right hand of God in the glory of the Father. We believe that Thou shalt come to be our Judge. We beseech Thee, therefore, help Thy servants: whom Thou has redeemed with Thy precious Blood. Make them to be numbered with Thy Saints in glory everlasting. Lord, save Thy people: and bless Thine inheritance. Govern them and lift them up forever. Day by day we bless Thee. And we praise Thy name forever: and world without end. Vouchsafe, O Lord, this day to keep us without sin. Have mercy on us, O Lord: have mercy on us. Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us: as we have hoped in Thee. O Lord, in Thee have I hoped: let me never be confounded. 
 V. Blessed are art Thou, O Lord, the God of our fathers. R. Praised, worthy and exalted above all forever. V. Let us bless the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. R. Let us praise him and exalt him above all forever. V. Bless the Lord, O my soul. R. And forget not all he has done for Thee. V. O Lord, hear my prayer. R. And let my cry come to Thee. V. The Lord be with you. R. And with thy spirit. 
 Let us pray 
 O God, whose mercy is unlimited and whose goodness is inexhaustible, we thank Thee for all that Thou in Thy loving majesty hast given us. We ask that Thou, who always answerest those who pray, may in Thy mercy not abandon them, but prepare them to receive eternal rewards. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 

 id="file23242554" filename="blessing-home-and-household-epiphany" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.usccb.org/prayers/blessing-home-and-household-epiphany">
 Blessing of the Home and Household on Epiphany 
 The traditional date of Epiphany is January 6, but in the United States it is celebrated on the Sunday between January 2 and January 8. 
 When all have gathered, a suitable song may be sung. The leader makes the sign of the cross, and all reply, “Amen.  The leader greets those present in the following words: 
 Let us praise God, who fills our hearts and homes with peace. Blessed be God forever. R/. Blessed be God forever. 
 In the following or similar words, the leader prepares those present for the blessing: 
 The Word became flesh and made his dwelling place among us. It is Christ who enlightens our hearts and homes with his love. May all who enter this home find Christ’s light and love. 
 One of those present or the leader reads a text of sacred Scripture, for example, Luke 19:1-9: 
 Listen to the words of the holy Gospel according to Luke: Jesus came to Jericho and intended to pass through the town. Now a man there named Zacchaeus, who was a chief tax collector and also a wealthy man, was seeking to see who Jesus was; but he could not see him because of the crowd, for he was short in stature. So he ran ahead and climbed a sycamore tree in order to see Jesus, who was about to pass that way.> When he reached the place, Jesus looked up and said to him, “Zacchaeus, come down quickly, for today I must stay at your house.  And he came down quickly and received him with joy. When they all saw this, they began to grumble, saying, “He has gone to stay at the house of a sinner.  But Zacchaeus stood there and said to the Lord, “Behold, half of my possessions, Lord, I shall give to the poor, and if I have extorted anything from anyone I shall repay it four times over.  And Jesus said to him, “Today salvation has come to this house because this man too is a descendant of Abraham.  
 The intercessions are then said: 
 Leader: The Son of God made his home among us. With thanks and praise let us call upon him. R/. Stay with us, Lord. Leader: Lord Jesus Christ, with Mary and Joseph you formed the Holy Family: remain in our home, that we may know you as our guest and honor you as our Head. We pray: R/. Stay with us, Lord. Leader: Lord Jesus Christ, you had no place to lay your head, but in the spirit of poverty accepted the hospitality of your friends: grant that through our help the homeless may obtain proper housing. We pray: R/. Stay with us, Lord. Leader:Lord Jesus Christ, the three kings presented their gifts to you in praise and adoration: grant that those living in this house may use their talents and abilities to your greater glory. We pray: R/. Stay with us, Lord. 
 After the intercessions the leader invites all present to say the Lord’s Prayer. The leader says the prayer of blessing with hands joined: 
 Lord God of heaven and earth, you revealed your only-begotten Son to every nation by the guidance of a star. Bless this house and all who inhabit it. Fill them (us) with the light of Christ, that their (our) concern for others may reflect your love. We ask this through Christ our Lord. R/. Amen. 
 The leader concludes the rite by signing himself or herself with the sign of the cross and saying: 
 May Christ Jesus dwell with us, keep us from all harm, and make us one in mind and heart, now and forever. R/. Amen. 
 It is preferable to end the celebration with a suitable song, for example, “O Come, All Ye Faithful  or “We Three Kings.  

 id="file23242723" filename="blessing.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.studylight.org/dictionaries/eng/bed/b/blessing.html">
 Tired of seeing ads while studying? Now you can enjoy an "Ads Free" version of the site for as little as 10¢ a day and support a great cause! Click here to learn more! 
 God's intention and desire to bless humanity is a central focus of his covenant relationships. For this reason, the concept of blessing pervades the biblical record. Two distinct ideas are present. First, a blessing was a public declaration of a favored status with God. Second, the blessing endowed power for prosperity and success. In all cases, the blessing served as a guide and motivation to pursue a course of life within the blessing. 
 The Old Testament Terms for blessing abound in the Old Testament, occurring over 600 times. The major terms are related to the word meaning "to kneel, " since in earlier times one would kneel to receive a blessing. 
 The history of Israel begins with the promise of blessing. The curse, which had dominated the early chapters of the biblical story (Genesis 3:14,17; 4:11; 5:29; 9:25 ), was countered by God's promise to Abraham that "all peoples on earth will be blessed through you" (Genesis 12:3 ). The record of Israel's past is best understood as an outworking of blessing and cursing (Deuteronomy 27:1-28:68 ). 
 The institutions of societythe family, government, and religionwere the means by which ceremonial blessings were received. Within the family the father blessed his wife and children (Genesis 27:27-29; 49:25-26; 1 Samuel 2:20 ). In the government context, the ruler blessed his subjects (2 Samuel 6:18; 1 Kings 8:14,55 ). Those who possessed a priestly role were bestowed with the privilege of blessing (Genesis 14:19; Leviticus 9:22 ). The tribe of Levi was set apart "to pronounce blessings in his [the Lord's] name" (Deuteronomy 10:8; 21:5 ). 
 Three common themes are present in formal Old Testament blessings. First, the greater blesses the lesser, a fact picked up by the writer of Hebrews to demonstrate the superiority of Melchizedek to Abraham (Hebrews 7:6-7 ). Second, the blessing is a sign of special favor that is intended to result in prosperity and success (Deuteronomy 28:3-7 ). Third, the blessing is actually an invocation for God's blessing: "May God Almighty bless you and make you fruitful" (Genesis 28:3 ). 
 In a less ceremonial sense, the Scriptures declare a general blessing on the righteous. Those who are obedient to God's commands are blessed with affluence and victory (Deuteronomy 28:1-14 ). On the other hand, those who are disobedient are cursed (Deuteronomy 28:15-68 ) and suffer the consequences of drought, disease, and deprivation. 
 It is also possible for a person to "bless" God. The terminology arises as a response to the blessings bestowed by God: "Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits" (Psalm 103:2; KJV ). These occurrences of "bless" are usually translated "praise" or "extol" in modern versions. 
 The New Testament The parallels between the Old and New Testament usages of blessing are striking. To be blessed is to be granted special favor by God with resulting joy and prosperity. In the New Testament, however, the emphasis is more on spiritual rather than on material blessings. 
 God's promise to Abraham again serves as a foundation for blessings. The pledge that "all peoples on earth shall be blessed" (Genesis 12:3 ) is fulfilled in the person and work of Jesus Christ (Galatians 3:8-14 ). He has borne the consequences of the curse for believers (Galatians 3:13 ) and blessed them with the forgiveness of sins (Romans 4:6-9; see Psalm 32:1-2 ). Believers are "blessed with every spiritual blessing in Christ" (Ephesians 1:3 ) and now inherit the blessings promised through the patriarchs (Hebrews 6:12,15; 12:17; 1 Peter 3:9 ). As a result of receiving God's blessings in Christ, believers are called to be a source of blessing to the world, especially in response to those who persecute them (Luke 6:27-28; Romans 12:14; 1 Corinthians 4:12; 1 Peter 3:9; cf. Isaiah 19:24; Zechariah 8:13 ). 
 In a general sense, the terms for blessing in the New Testament are used to designate that one is favored by God. Included among these are Jesus (Mark 11:9-10 ); children (Mark 10:13-16 ); Mary (Luke 1:42,48 ); the disciples (Luke 24:50 ); those who "have not seen and yet have believed" (John 20:29 ); and those who endure trials (James 1:12; 5:11 ). As in the Old Testament, when these words are ascribed to God they are rendered "praise" (Romans 1:25; 9:5; 2 Corinthians 11:31 ). 
 The most recognizable references to blessing come from the teachings of Jesus. He declares that in spite of difficulties at the present time, the promises of God's salvation and coming kingdom bring a state of happiness and recognized favor with God (Matthew 5:3-10; Luke 6:20-22 ). The culmination of the Scriptures proclaims the end of the curse (Revelation 22:3 ) and the eternal blessedness of the people of God (Revelation 20:6; 22:7 ). 
 William E. Brown 
 Bibliography . W. Eichrodt, Theology of the Old Testament; H.-G. Link and U. Becker, NIDNTT, 3:206-18. 
 Bibliography Information Elwell, Walter A. Entry for 'Blessing'. Evangelical Dictionary of Biblical Theology. https://www.studylight.org/dictionaries/eng/bed/b/blessing.html. 1996. 
 Lectionary Calendar 
 Thursday, January 20th, 2022 the Second Week after Epiphany 
 To report dead links, typos, or html errors or suggestions about making these resources more useful use the convenient contact form 

 id="file23242587" filename="blessing-in-the-old-testament-a-biblical-theology-of-blessing-2" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://malaysiagospel.org/article/blessing-in-the-old-testament-a-biblical-theology-of-blessing-2/">
 Blessing in the Old Testament: A Biblical Theology of Blessing (Part 2) 
 Paul Barker 
 5 Minute Read 
 In part 1 of this series, we began to explore prosperity theology – the idea that Christians should expect the same kind of material blessing enjoyed by God’s people in the Old Testament. We looked at some of the different responses that have been made to the prosperity movement and concluded that there remains a need for a deep engagement with biblical theology. This week we will begin to highlight some of the important points that such an engagement would need to observe, beginning with the Old Testament. 
 Genesis 1 
 James McKeown – 
 The theme of blessing begins in Genesis 1. On day 5, God blesses the sea creatures and birds (Genesis 1:22). On day 6 he blesses humanity: “Be fruitful and multiply … and have dominion …  (Genesis 1:28). Blessing here is an expression of being in favour or relationship with God. It involves the gift of fertility and an ability to subdue and rule the world. 
 Blessing often signifies being protected by, and provided for, by God. We see this in the blessing on Noah (Gen 6:22; 8:20; 8:21-9:17); in the greetings of Boaz (Ruth 2:4, 12); and especially in the Aaronic blessing of Numbers 6:24-26. As James McKeown writes: “God bestows blessing on those who are in harmony with him. [1] “The importance of the theme of blessing lies in its significance as an indicator of a person’s relationship with God. [2] 
 Fall 
 The effects of sin and its spread bring the opposite of blessing; namely curse. In Genesis 3-11 the serpent is cursed (3:14); the ground is cursed (3:17); and, Cain is cursed from the ground (4:11). Noah will bring relief because the ground is cursed (5:29); and, Canaan is also cursed (9:25). 
 The Promises to Abraham 
 After all this cursing, blessing is a major theme in the promises to Abraham. The Abrahamic promises seek to reverse the effects of the Fall and restore creation to the blessedness seen in Genesis 1. 
 First, Abraham will have a seed. This is part of the promise in 12:2 that Abraham will become a great nation and is later elaborated with reference to dust of the earth (13:16), stars in the sky (15:5; 22:17) and sand of the seashore (22:17). It should be obvious this promise connects to the original creation blessing of fertility. Abraham’s line will be exceedingly fertile. 
 Second, Abraham is promised a land. Like the promise of descendants, the promise of land is made explicit later, in this case in 12:7. God promises Abraham’s descendants the land in which he stands. 
 Third, and central to the seven clauses of Genesis 12:2-3, Abraham himself will be a blessing. Lohr argues that the central point of Genesis 12:2-3 is that Abraham will be fabulously blessed.[3] 
 Fourth. But the blessing is not focused on Abraham. Rather, he is to become a conduit of God’s blessing to others. Other nations will be blessed through Abraham. There is an escalation in the promises to Abraham: (i) Abraham will be blessed, (ii) he will be a blessing, and (iii) all the nations will receive blessing.[4] 
 Separating the promises into these headings can be useful, but these promises also belong together. Taken as a whole the promises given to Abraham are programmatic for the purposes of God and thus for the narrative of Scripture, to restore the whole world. So the theme of blessing must be understood within this context – especially the purpose of blessing other nations.[5] 
 At the same time we should remember that blessing is fundamentally an expression of relationship with God. To be blessed is to have God’s favour – and blessing references abound at major transition points to make this point. God promises blessing at the call of Abraham; the marriage of Isaac; the departure of Jacob for Haran; and through Jacob’s deathbed blessing of his sons. 
 Deuteronomy 28 
 The blessings of Deuteronomy 28:1-14 derive from covenant promises to Abraham. The Sinai laws add fresh detail and make it clear that the promises will be realised through Israel’s obedience to law. 
 These verses unquestionably speak of earthly (and not just spiritual) prosperity and fertility. We read, for example, that “the Lord will make you abound in prosperity,  (28:11). But they also serve God’s goal of bringing blessing to all the nations. As verse 10 puts it: “All the peoples of the earth shall see that you are called by the name of the Lord, and they shall be afraid of you.  
 These blessings also speak of the favour and harmony that arise from the covenant relationship. As Mary J. Evans points out, “This blessing is not portrayed as a reward for keeping the law; it rests on God’s promise and is an automatic consequence of being in a relationship with him. [6] 
 It is also important to remember that these blessings are corporate. They belong to an obedient people of God. If Israel is obedient, these blessings do not promise that each individual will be prosperous but rather the nation as a whole. For example the laws regarding cancelling debts, woven through Deuteronomy 15:1-11, bring blessing as they are obeyed: “There will, however, be no one in need among you, because the Lord is sure to bless you in the land, (Deut 15:4). Blessing does not remove the need for radical generosity. 
 We ought to note that the obedience/prosperity nexus that appears evident in Deuteronomy 28 is not always maintained – especially at the individual level – in the Old Testament. Job subverts this pattern. Proverbs 30:8 cautions against wealth, as does the law of the king in Deuteronomy 17:14-20. The ministries of Elijah and Jeremiah show examples of faithful Israelites suffering poverty despite their faithfulness. Finally the laws given through Moses restrict the accumulation of wealth and the prophets frequently rail against its abuse. 
 Overall then the Old Testament does presents a general pattern that connects material blessing with God’s favour, though there are important qualifiers. How do we go about applying these things to ourselves today? This is the question we will come to in our next post. 
 This article was originally published by The Gospel Coalition Australia and has been republished with permission of the author. 
 Get articles delivered straight to your inbox. Sign up for our mailing list here. 
 Follow us on: 
 Paul Barker is an Assistant Bishop in the Anglican Diocese of Melbourne. Until 2016 he was Regional Coordinator for Asia for Langham Preaching, a Visiting Lecturer at Myanmar Evangelical Graduate School of Theology and taught in a variety of other Asian seminaries. He is the author of The Triumph of Grace in Deuteronomy, a book of expositions on Amos and other articles and short books. Formerly he was Senior Minister of Holy Trinity Anglican Church Doncaster, Melbourne. 
 Related Articles 
 Bethel Church in Redding, California, is becoming increasingly influential amongst churches in my own city of Sydney. This is partly due to its promotion by Hillsong and also because of its influential music label. So I’ve set myself the task of reading through some of Bethel’s books in order to understand their theology... 
 Does Jesus really expect believers to raise the dead as part of “normal Christian life? Stephen Tan considers two unhelpful responses. In John’s Gospel, Jesus performs a series of signs to show that he is Israel’s long-awaited Messiah. In John 11, he performs the climactic sign, raising to life his friend Lazarus, who had been dead and buried four days. 
 Few evangelicals today will question the importance of expository preaching. What is less clear, however, is our commitment to preach the whole Bible—every verse, every chapter and every book. In The Whole Counsel of God, Tim Patrick and Andrew Reid convincingly argue that it is not enough for us to merely preach from the Bible... 

 id="file23242525" filename="blessing-of-Abraham.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.gotquestions.org/blessing-of-Abraham.html">
 Find Out 
 What is the blessing of Abraham? 
 Answer 
 The blessing of Abraham is the gracious heavenly gift that Abraham received as part of God’s plan to create a new nation on earth. The blessing of Abraham is also sometimes misused in prosperity theology to claim that believers today can be just as rich and successful as Abraham was. 
 First, we’ll take a look at the historical context of Abraham’s blessing. God’s blessing to Abraham is recorded in Genesis 12:1–3: “The Lord had said to Abram, ‘Go from your country, your people and your father’s household to the land I will show you. 
 “‘I will make you into a great nation, and I will bless you; I will make your name great, and you will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and whoever curses you I will curse; and all peoples on earth will be blessed through you.’  
 Here, Abraham is blessed, and that blessing includes the promise that he will have a great name (reputation) and that he would become a great nation (have many descendants). God will bless those who bless him; furthermore, Abraham will be a blessing. Through Abraham all nations on earth will be blessed. The blessing of Abraham finds its ultimate fulfillment in Jesus Christ, the “Seed  of Abraham (Galatians 3:16) and the Redeemer of the world. 
 The rest of the Bible records how these promises were fulfilled and the blessing of Abraham advanced. In Genesis we see Abraham gaining a great reputation, and we see how his descendants multiplied, even though, at the time the promise was made, he had no hope of ever having any children. By Exodus 1, the children of Abraham, the Israelites, are a great people, and the rest of Exodus through Joshua records how the people became a nation with their own land and law. The books of Judges and 1 and 2 Samuel address the leadership of the nation as a king, and how the dynasty of David was established. However, things began to unravel, and the people broke the law of God and followed other gods. Frequently, the kings did not reign as God’s loyal representatives but often followed their own desires. Prophets who spoke for God warned the nation that judgment was coming and that they were in danger of losing their land. The same prophets also began to hint at other, greater things such as an ideal Davidic ruler who would rule not only Israel but the whole world—and Gentiles would somehow be part of this kingdom (see Isaiah 9). 
 When Jesus came on the scene, all of the pieces started to fit into place. Jesus is the Davidic Messiah who will not only rule over Israel but over the whole world (Revelation 19:15). Anyone, including Gentiles, who comes to Him in repentance and faith is made part of His kingdom, while those Jews who reject Him will be left out. Paul was the foremost apostle responsible for taking the good news (the gospel) to the Gentiles. 
 In Galatians, Paul explains the importance of grace as opposed to the keeping of the law. He also points out that in Genesis 15:6 Abraham was justified by faith. Obviously, this was before any law had been given—430 years before, according to Galatians 3:17. In verse 7 Paul explains that it is those who have the kind of faith that Abraham had that are truly children of Abraham, even if they are Gentiles. This is the fulfillment of the blessing of Abraham and God’s promise that through Abraham all peoples (Gentiles) would be blessed. 
 The blessing of Abraham was a benefit to Abraham himself. In terms of the ancient world, he was a success: he was well-respected, he was healthy, and he had many descendants. However, the blessing Abraham received from God went far beyond those immediate, personal blessings. Through Abraham the whole world was blessed because Jesus is a descendant of Abraham. Because of Jesus any person, Jew or Gentile, can be forgiven and be in His kingdom. In Christ, we receive the spiritual blessing of justification, just as Abraham did: “If you belong to Christ, then you are Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise  (Galatians 3:29). 
 There are some teachers in the Word of Faith movement who claim the blessing of Abraham for themselves, in all of its detail. Since we are “Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise  (Galatians 3:29), then we can have all that Abraham had—or so the teaching goes. Christ redeemed us from more than just sin and the law; He redeemed us from “poverty  and “sickness,  because those things are supposedly included in the blessing of Abraham. 
 Some Word of Faith teachers see a three-fold blessing of Abraham available to Christians today: a material, financial blessing; a physical blessing; and a spiritual blessing. Others see a seven-fold blessing of Abraham: 1) I will make you into a great nation, 2) I will bless you, 3) I will make your name great, 4) you will be a blessing, 5) I will bless those who bless you, 6) whoever curses you I will curse, and 7) all peoples on earth will be blessed through you. These promises to Abraham are applied directly to the Christian today. The result is protection, blessing (physical and material), fame and recognition, etc. 
 Those who twist Scripture and “decree and declare  the blessing of Abraham over themselves believe that 1) God will make me and my family into some type of “great nation ; 2) God will bless me and my family; 3) God will make my name great; 4) My family and I will be a blessing; 5) God will bless those who bless me; 6) whoever curses me God will curse; and 7) everyone on earth will be blessed through me and my family. 
 The problem with claiming the blessing of Abraham for ourselves, expecting physical, earthly blessings, is that the blessing was given to Abraham, a specific individual in history, for a specific reason. We cannot simply insert ourselves into a biblical text. It’s more than bad hermeneutics; it leads to serious error. 
 The theme of Galatians 3 is justification by faith. Paul never teaches that a Christian has a “right  to prosperity and ease: “So also Abraham ‘believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness.’ Understand, then, that those who have faith are children of Abraham. Scripture foresaw that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, and announced the gospel in advance to Abraham: ‘All nations will be blessed through you.’ So those who rely on faith are blessed along with Abraham, the man of faith  (verses 6–9, emphasis added). The faith of Abraham led to his justification, and that is the blessing of Abraham that we share today. As people of faith, we are justified in Christ. 

 id="file23242552" filename="blessing-of-a-home" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.stmichaelportland.org/blessing-of-a-home">
 rite for the blessing of a home 
 In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. 
 Amen. 
 Peace be with this house and with all who live here. 
 And with your spirit. 
 When Christ took flesh through the Blessed Virgin Mary, he made his home with us. Let us now pray that he will enter this home and bless it with his presence. May he always be here with you, share in your joys, comfort you in your sorrows. Inspired by his teachings and example, seek to make your new home before all else a dwelling place of love, diffusing far and wide the goodness of Christ. 
 Reading of the Word of God 
 Listen to the words of the holy gospel according to Luke: 10:5-9 
 The Lord said to the seventy-two: "Into whatever house you enter, first say, ‘Peace to this household.' If a peaceful person lives there, your peace will rest on him; but if not, it will return to you. Stay in the same house and eat and drink what is offered to you, for the laborer deserves his payment. Do not move about from one house to another. Whatever town you enter and they welcome you, eat what is set before you, cure the sick in it, and say to them, ‘The kingdom of God is at hand for you.'" 
 Alternative Readings: 
 Jesus went straight to Simon's house. Mark 1:29-30 
 Martha welcomed Jesus into her house. Luke 10:38-42 
 Today salvation has come to this house. Luke 19:1-9 
 Stay with us. Luke 24:28-32 
 R. Happy are those who fear the Lord. Psalm 112 
 Happy the man who fears the Lord, who greatly delights in his commands.His posterity shall be mighty upon the earth; the upright generation shall be blessed. R. 
 Wealth and riches shall be in his house; his generosity shall endure for ever.He dawns through the darkness, a light for the upright; he is gracious and merciful and just. R. 
 Well for the man who is gracious and lends, who conducts his affairs with justice;He shall never be moved; the just man shall be in everlasting remembrance. R. 
 An evil report he shall not fear; his heart is firm, trusting in the Lord.His heart is steadfast; he shall not fear till he looks down upon his foes. R. 
 Lavishly he gives to the poor; his generosity shall endure for ever; his horn shall be exalted in glory. R. 
 Intercessions 
 The Son of God, Lord of heaven and earth, made his home among us. With thankfulness and gladness let us call upon him, saying: 
 R. Stay with us, Lord. 
 Assisting minister:Lord Jesus Christ, by your life with Mary and Joseph you sanctified the life of the home; dwell with us in our home, so that we may have you as our guest and honor you as our Head. (For this we pray:) R. 
 Assisting minister:In you every dwelling grows into a holy temple; grant that those who live in this house may be built up together into the dwelling place of God in the Holy Spirit. (For this we pray:) R. 
 Assisting minister:You taught your followers to build their houses upon solid rock; grant that the members of this family may hold fast to your teachings and, free of all discord, serve you with their whole heart. (For this we pray:) R. 
 Assisting minister:You had no place to lay your head, but in uncomplaining poverty you accepted the hospitality of your friends; grant that through our help people who are homeless may obtain decent housing. (For this we pray:) R. 
 Prayer of Blessing 
 Lord, be close to your servants who move into this home (today) and ask for your blessing. 
 Be their shelter when they are at home, their companion when they are away, and their welcome guest when they return.And at last receive them into the dwelling place you have prepared for them in your Father's house, where you live for ever and ever. R. Amen. 
 After the prayer of blessing, the minister sprinkles those present and the new home with holy water and, as circumstances suggest, during the sprinkling may say: 
 Let this water call to mind our Baptism into Christ, who has redeemed us by his death and resurrection. 
 Concluding Rite 
 The minister concludes the rite by saying: 
 May the peace of Christ rule in our hearts |, and may the word of Christ in all its richness dwell in us, | so that whatever we do in word and in work, | we will do in the name of the Lord. R. Amen. 

 id="file23242547" filename="blessing-of-salt-4697" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.ewtn.com/catholicism/library/blessing-of-salt-4697">
 Blessing of Salt 
 Author: Father Edward McNamara, LC 
 A ZENIT DAILY DISPATCH 
 Blessing of Salt 
 By Father Edward McNamara, LC 
 ROME, 22 October 2013 (ZENIT) Answered by Legionary of Christ Father Edward McNamara, professor of liturgy and dean of theology at the Regina Apostolorum university. 
 Q: The third typical edition of the Roman Missal does not appear to include the addition of blessed salt. Is this something that will be included as the Book of Blessings and the Rites are revised? Also, is it appropriate to use the Blessing of Salt from the sacramentary prior to adding it to newly blessed water? — J.B., Neillsville, Wisconsin 
 A: Actually, the third edition does retain the possibility of adding salt to blessed water. It is found toward the end of the missal as the second appendix. The adding of salt is not obligatory, however, and is left to local custom. 
 The ritual says: 
 "3. Where the circumstances of the place or the custom of the people suggest that the mixing of salt be preserved in the blessing of water, the Priest may bless salt, saying: 
 "We humbly ask you, almighty God: be pleased in your faithful love to bless this salt you have created, for it was you who commanded the prophet Elisha to cast salt into water, that impure water might be purified. Grant, O Lord, we pray, that, wherever this mixture of salt and water is sprinkled, every attack of the enemy may be repulsed and your Holy Spirit may be present to keep us safe at all times. Through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 
 "Then he pours the salt into the water, without saying anything. 
 "4. Afterward, taking the aspergillum, the Priest sprinkles himself and the ministers, then the clergy and people, moving through the church, if appropriate. 
 "Meanwhile, one of the following chants, or another appropriate chant is sung." 
 The reference to the prophet Elisha comes from his curing the poisoned waters with salt in 2 Kings 2:19-21. 
 The use of blessed salt with blessed water is particular to the Latin tradition. At first, blessed salt was tasted by those preparing for baptism, as testified by St. Augustine among others. The meaning was probably related to the allegorical significance of salt as a symbol of divine wisdom to those destined to be formed as "the salt of the earth." It was also used in the rite of baptism itself. 
 One of the earliest mentions of the use of blessed, or holy, water is found in a letter written in 538 by Pope Vigilius to Procuro of Braga in Portugal. Since the context of this letter suggests an established practice, it is possible to surmise that holy water was first used at Rome about a century earlier. There is evidence of people taking blessed water home and conserving it in vessels from the year 590, even though the practice of sprinkling the congregation at Mass is from the ninth century and the presence of fixed holy water fonts in churches did not appear until the 11th century. 
 The practice of mixing salt with this water is probably related to the fact that this custom was already widespread in pagan Rome; for salt was perceived as being effective in repelling evil spirits. This custom was simply carried into Christian practice once the pagan use had diminished to the point that there was no longer any danger of religious syncretism. 
 Therefore, even though the actions of the prophet Elisha are mentioned in the blessing prayer it is unlikely that this episode was a direct influence in forming the custom. 
 The earliest extant prayers of blessing of salt and water hail from Merovingian France sometime between the years 600 and 751. Most of the current prayers were composed in the early ninth century. 
 Although, as mentioned above, the origin of fixed holy water fonts is not historically related to the baptismal font, liturgical practice and private devotion have established such a relationship over the centuries. 
 Thus, the use of holy water is a reminder of baptism, the faith in the Trinity, and redemption through the cross. When water is blessed and sprinkled on a Sunday it reminds us that every Sunday is a little Easter and baptism is renewed in a symbolic manner. 
 Finally, the extraordinary form of the rite of blessing salt and water may be used but not in such a way that the two forms of the Roman rite are joined in a single celebration. Nor is it necessary as the rite is still found in the ordinary-form missal. 
 * * * 
 Follow-up: Blessing of Salt [05-11-2013] 
 An attentive reader made the following observation to our Oct. 22 comments on the rite of Blessing of Salt: 
 "I was left confused by the last paragraph […]: 'Finally, the extraordinary form of the rite of blessing salt and water may be used but not in such a way that the two forms of the Roman rite are joined in a single celebration. Nor is it necessary as the rite is still found in the ordinary-form missal.' I was not sure whether you were referring to the asperges we were used to as altar servers in the 1960s and the blessing of water which was done in the sacristy. In the rite of exorcism which I was recently reading in the ICEL Green Book stage of translation, I again saw the beautiful prayers for exorcism and blessing of salt and water which I have used for many years in preparing blessed water for people who ask for it. But I have never thought of that as belonging to the extraordinary form. But when I came to the diocese I did find priests who were using the asperges as in the old form, as part of the entrance procession on Sundays. With a bit of time they were weaned off it. In short, is the blessing of water and salt, as found in the Missal of Paul VI, now in its third edition, considered the ordinary form of blessing?" 
 I referred above all to not mixing the two rites, as mentioned by our reader, regarding the use of the asperges at the entrance procession. 
 That said, I would say that the rite as found in the third edition of the missal is the ordinary form for the situations described in the missal. That is at the beginning of Mass. 
 Other approved rites for blessing water outside of Mass, such as that of the Book of Exorcisms, are also the ordinary form in their proper contexts. 
 ZENIT International News Agency Via della Stazione di Ottavia, 95 00165 Rome, Italy www.zenit.org 
 To subscribe http://www.zenit.org/english/subscribe.html or email: english-request@zenit.org with SUBSCRIBE in the "subject" field 
 Provided Courtesy of: Eternal Word Television Network 5817 Old Leeds Road Irondale, AL 35210 www.ewtn.com 
 HOME - EWTNews - FAITH - TELEVISION - RADIO - LIBRARY - MULTIMEDIA WHAT'S NEW - GENERAL - RELIGIOUS CATALOGUE - PILGRIMAGES - ESPAÑOL 

 id="file23242617" filename="blessing-others-blesses-you" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.calvarywestlaketake5.org/post/blessing-others-blesses-you">
 Blessing Others Blesses You 
 Throughout this school year that was so rudely disrupted by the Coronavirus, I have regularly received a batch of notes of encouragement from Mrs. Laurie Hagberg's 6th-grade class at Hillcrest Christian School here in Thousand Oaks. I am not sure of the frequency, the assignment, if other classes adopted various lead pastors at area churches, or if the students even know who I am. But, God used each packet of notes that have arrived to bless and encourage me. 
 Mrs. Hagberg didn't send a note ahead of the first batch saying something like, "Pastor Shawn, I want to give you a heads up that our class will be sending you notes of encouragement throughout the school year as part of a schoolwide outreach (or as part of a class writing assignment)." Actually, I am glad she did not. My assistant, Lareita, and I had some fun trying to figure out why the first packet of notes came to me and in reading what the students had written. I think I have received at least three packages of notes during this school year from Mrs. Hagberg's class. 
 In a few of the notes, the 6th-graders identified themselves as part of the Calvary family. Some mentioned hearing a sermon or two from me when they sat with their parents in the main Worship Center for a service. Others told me what churches they go to and what they like about their pastor or church. One sweet girl referenced that her dad was a pastor at another local church, and she knew that he and I were friends. 
 Several thanked me for "Preaching the Gospel," "Teaching the Bible," or "Leading such a big church." Others of the students have drawn me pictures, told me about the church and pastor where their families are involved, or written out Bible verses or simple prayers they prayed for me. I have received each note as a blessing from God through the heart, mind, and writing of each student. I have not asked Mrs. Hagberg for any of the details behind the writing of the notes. I don't want to spoil the simplicity, sweetness, and encouragement each note conveys by learning all of the requirements and logistics behind the packets that arrive. 
 This week, I received an email with a link posting notes from the class (you can see the screen of these in the picture included in this devotional). No one would blame Mrs. Hagberg and her class if, in the transition to online school, they stopped writing and sending me these notes of encouragement. But this week they again sent a fresh batch of encouragement and blessing! Thank you, Mrs. Hagberg, and your sixth-graders for your continued kindness. It is not expected, but it is much appreciated. 
 After Jesus had washed His disciples' feet in the Upper Room the night He would later be betrayed and tried before Religious and Roman leaders, Jesus encouraged His disciples to follow His example. He pointed out that they see Him as and call Him their teacher and leader. He commended them for that. Then he pointed out that in washing their feet, He had done something other teachers and leaders would not do. He had humbled Himself to bless them by kneeling and washing their dirty feet. As Jesus told them they should follow His example, he then promised them that as they did, they would not only bless others but be blessed by God themselves. 
 May God bring a sense of fulfillment and satisfaction to Mrs. Hagberg's 6th-graders! May they know the promise Jesus gives us that as we bless others, we will be blessed. They have blessed me. May God bless them. 
 How about you? Do you understand that when you selflessly help meet the needs of others or you go out of your way to value and encourage them, that God will bless you? Our motivation should not be to do whatever we have to do to get a blessing for ourselves. It should be a selfless desire to bring encouragement to others and let God take care of when and how He blesses. Just love someone else unconditionally, and God will keep unconditionally loving you! Find someone to bless practically today with words of affirmation or acts of love (or both)! 
 God blesses us as we humbly bless and encourage others! 

 id="file23242523" filename="blessings" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/tag/blessings">
 Blessings Quotes 
 Quotes tagged as "blessings" Showing 1-30 of 849 
 “Focus on your strengths, not your weaknesses. Focus on your character, not your reputation. Focus on your blessings, not your misfortunes.  ― Roy T. Bennett, The Light in the Heart 
 “Count your blessings, not your problems. Count your own blessings, not someone else's. Remember that jealousy is when you count someone else's blessings instead of your own.  ― Roy T. Bennett, The Light in the Heart 
 “Live your truth. Express your love. Share your enthusiasm. Take action towards your dreams. Walk your talk. Dance and sing to your music. Embrace your blessings. Make today worth remembering.  ― Steve Maraboli, Unapologetically You: Reflections on Life and the Human Experience 
 “Reflect upon your present blessings -- of which every man has many -- not on your past misfortunes, of which all men have some.  ― Charles Dickens, A Christmas Carol and Other Christmas Writings 
 “When we lose one blessing, another is often most unexpectedly given in its place.  ― C.S. Lewis 
 “Those who expect to reap the blessings of freedom, must, like men, undergo the fatigues of supporting it.  ― Thomas Paine 
 “You have to participate relentlessly in the manifestation of your own blessings.  ― Elizabeth Gilbert 
 “For Equilibrium, a Blessing: Like the joy of the sea coming home to shore, May the relief of laughter rinse through your soul. 
 As the wind loves to call things to dance, May your gravity by lightened by grace. 
 Like the dignity of moonlight restoring the earth, May your thoughts incline with reverence and respect. 
 As water takes whatever shape it is in, So free may you be about who you become. 
 As silence smiles on the other side of what's said, May your sense of irony bring perspective. 
 As time remains free of all that it frames, May your mind stay clear of all it names. 
 “If we never experience the chill of a dark winter, it is very unlikely that we will ever cherish the warmth of a bright summer’s day. Nothing stimulates our appetite for the simple joys of life more than the starvation caused by sadness or desperation. In order to complete our amazing life journey successfully, it is vital that we turn each and every dark tear into a pearl of wisdom, and find the blessing in every curse.  ― Anthon St. Maarten, Divine Living: The Essential Guide To Your True Destiny 
 “Blessings be on this house," Granny said, perfunctorily. It was always a good opening remark for a witch. It concentrated people's minds on what other things might be on this house.  ― Terry Pratchett, Witches Abroad 
 “Free yourself from the complexities and drama of your life. Simplify. Look within. Within ourselves we all have the gifts and talents we need to fulfill the purpose we've been blessed with.  ― Steve Maraboli, Life, the Truth, and Being Free 
 “Those born to wealth, and who have the means of gratifying every wish, know not what is the real happiness of life, just as those who have been tossed on the stormy waters of the ocean on a few frail planks can alone realize the blessings of fair weather.  ― Alexandre Dumas, The Count of Monte Cristo 
 “It is only with true love and compassion that we can begin to mend what is broken in the world. It is these two blessed things that can begin to heal all broken hearts.  ― Steve Maraboli, Life, the Truth, and Being Free 
 “The unthankful heart discovers no mercies; but the thankful heart will find, in every hour, some heavenly blessings.  ― Henry Ward Beecher 
 “When you wish someone joy, you wish them peace, love, prosperity, happiness... all the good things.  ― Maya Angelou 
 “Don't you quit. You keep walking. You keep trying. There is help and happiness ahead. Some blessings come soon, some come late, and some don’t come until heaven; but for those who embrace the gospel of Jesus Christ, they come. It will be all right in the end. Trust God and believe in good things to come.  ― Jeffrey R. Holland 
 “... it’s a blessed thing to love and feel loved in return.  ― E.A. Bucchianeri, Brushstrokes of a Gadfly, 
 “Blessed is he who has learned to admire but not envy, to follow but not imitate, to praise but not flatter, and to lead but not manipulate.  ― William Arthur Ward 
 “Those blessings are sweetest that are won with prayer and worn with thanks.  ― Thomas Goodwin 
 “We all are so deeply interconnected; we have no option but to love all. Be kind and do good for any one and that will be reflected. The ripples of the kind heart are the highest blessings of the Universe.  ― Amit Ray, Yoga and Vipassana: An Integrated Life Style 
 “God gave you a gift of 84,600 seconds today. Have you used one of them to say thank you?  ― William Arthur Ward 
 “Even seasonal situations can bring with them lessons that last a lifetime. If the love doesn’t last, it prepares you for the one that will.  ― Mandy Hale, The Single Woman: Life, Love, and a Dash of Sass 
 “The hardest arithmetic to master is that which enables us to count our blessings.  ― Eric Hoffer 
 “When God takes out the trash, don't go digging back through it. Trust Him.  ― Amaka Imani Nkosazana, Heart Crush 
 “This new day has greeted us with no rules; unconditional opportunity. Do not dilute the power of this new day with the hardship of yesterday. Greet this day the way it has greeted you; with open arms and endless possibility.  ― Steve Maraboli, Life, the Truth, and Being Free 
 “Sometimes we focus so much on what we don't have that we fail to see, appreciate, and use what we do have!  ― Jeff Dixon 
 “Sometimes, you will go through awful trials in your life and then a miracle happens--God heals you. Don’t be disheartened when the people you love don’t see things like you do. There will be Pharisees in your life that will laugh it off, deny that it happened, or will mock your experience based on righteousness they think you don't possess. God won't deny you a spiritual experience because you are not a spiritual leader. He loves everyone equal. The only people that really matter in life are the people that can “see  your heart and rejoice with you.  ― Shannon L. Alder 

 id="file23242516" filename="Blessings" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://tibia.fandom.com/wiki/Blessings">
 There are a total of 8 blessings. Their names and location where they are obtained follow: 
 This blessing has two parts. You must obtain both parts of the blessing in the correct order (first Kawill, then Pydar). You will get a 10% price discount if you have a Phoenix Egg in your inventory. For this to work, you have to have completed the Paradox Tower Quest (you don't need to have picked the Phoenix Egg as a reward, so you can get it from another player) 
 Works as 5 regular blessings at once if you have completed The Inquisition Quest (even if you don't have Premium Time running at that moment). This will cost you 10% more than buying all blessing separately. 
 With the introduction of Dawnport in Update 10.55, all newly created characters on Open PvP worlds will automatically receive this blessing. It will protect them from death through player killing either until they reach level 21 or attack another player. In addition, all already existing players who were below level 21 at the time of the update with no player kill in their history also received this blessing. 
 ✗ 
 After death a character loses all blessings, except if the character was blessed with the Twist of Fate and is killed by other players (only Twist of Fate will be lost then). You can check which blessings you have already bought by opening the Blessings window above the amulet slot or using a Ceremonial Ankh or an Ornamented Brooch. 
 You can obtain every regular blessing with 1000 gp off if you do the Pilgrimage of Ashes Quest. The discount is valid only once. 
 Blessing Charges 
 Since the Update 11.30, you can accumulate Blessing Charges by buying them from the Store or in case you receive them due to death compensation. Blessing Charges are pre-paid blessings there are ready to use. You can check your currently number of charges using the Blessings Window that can be accessed by clicking a small button above the amulet slot. 
 The Blessings Window can be used to check what Blessings your character currently possess in case you are in doubt. 
 Travelling 
 The safest and fastest way to buy all five basic blessings if you don't have the possibility to buy the Blessing of the Inquisition is as follows: 
 If you prefer saving some money, you should start in Edron, travel to Cormaya by boat or through Edron Rotworm Cave, from there to Eremo's Island and buy the Wisdom of Solitude. Go back to Edron and take the Magic Carpet to Femor Hills. Walk to Carlin and buy the Embrace of Tibia; then walk to Ab'Dendriel and buy the Fire of the Suns. From there walk to Kazordoon and buy the Spark of the Phoenix. Finally, go to the White Flower Temple and buy Spiritual Shielding. 
 For Yalahar residents a good and fast route is Yalahar → Carlin (1 blessing) → Ab'Dendriel (1 blessing) → Edron → Cormaya → Eremo (1 blessing) → Cormaya, use Steamship/return to Edron, use Magic Carpet → Kazordoon, use Ore Wagons (1 blessing in two parts) → Cormaya → Edron → Thais (1 blessing) → Yalahar. You'll need ~1225 gp travel money (or less if you have achieved the Grand Postman rank in The Postman Missions) to cover for all Boat and Steamship and Ore Wagon fees. 
 Experience and Skill Loss 
 Until level 23, a non-promoted character loses 10% of its experience and skill points if it has no blessings when dying. Starting at level 24 the proportion of experience loss to the total experience begins to decrease. At level 24, 74% of the experience necessary to go from level 23 to 24 is lost. This percentage increases in steps of 1% every level, reaching 100%, i.e one whole level, at level 50. This rate can also be explained in terms of levels lost: every 50 levels, a character loses half a level more, starting with losing 1 level for a character at level 50. A character at level 100 will lose 1.5 level upon death, 2 levels at 150, 2.3 levels at 180 ,2.5 levels at 200 and so on. 
 Each of the 7 available blessings reduces the experience and skill loss by 8% of the base death penalties. Promoting your character will decrease the loss by 30% of the base value. Therefore, the maximum possible reduction is 86% of the value calculated with the full penalty. 
 4 blessings = 32.00% less Skill / XP loss. 
 Item loss 
 Without blessings the chance of dropping any piece of equipment will be 10%. There is 100% chance of dropping your container equipped in the backpack slot and its entire content. 
 1 blessing by 30%: this will reduce your equipment being lost to 7%, for a container it will be reduced to 70%. 2 blessings by 55%: 4.5% chance of dropping equipment, 45% chance of dropping a container. 3 blessings by 75%: 2.5% chance to drop equipment, 25% chance of dropping a container. 4 blessings by 90%: 1% chance to drop any piece of equipment, 10% to drop a container. 5 or more blessings will give full protection against item loss. 
 Note: A red or black skulled player will not have any protection against item loss and will still pay full price for all blessings. 
 Price 
 The price of the 5 regular blessings is a function of level, defined in piecewise fashion: 
 If level is less than or equal to 30, the price of each regular blessing is 2,000 gold (10,000 total) 
 If level is greater than 30 and less than 120, the price of each regular blessing is 2,000 plus 200 for each level above 30. That is,. This simplifies to thus you can derive a number by subtracting 20 from your level and multiplying by 1,000 (for all regular 5 blessings) 
 If level is greater or equal to 120, each regular blessing will be constant at 20,000 gold (100,000 for all) and each enhanced blessing will cost 26,000 gold. 
 You cannot buy a blessing from its respective NPC if you already have at least one charge of it. In this situation, you can only buy it from the Store. 
 The quickest way for players of level 30–120 to find out how much is needed for the 5 regular blessings is to simply subtract 20 from their level, and they get the amount in thousands of gold needed. 
 Similarly, players from the same level range can determine how much is needed for all 7 blessings by subtracting 20 from their level, then multiplying it by 1.52 and they get the amount in thousands of gold needed. 
 Additionally, players from the same level range can determine how much is needed in total for all 7 blessings and Twist of Fate by subtracting 20 from their level, then multiplying it by 1.72 and they get the amount in thousands of gold needed. 
 Example for a level 75 player: 
 , hence, 55000 gold for the 5 regular blessings. 
 , hence, 83600 gold in total for all 7 blessings. 
 , hence, 94600 gold in total for all 7 blessings and Twist of Fate. 
 The table below shows the blessings in each price, all blessings and all blessings including Twist of Fate. Prices are displayed in Gold Coins. 
 After level 120, all blessings are the same price. Twist of Fate, however, increases in price until level 270 where it costs 50,000 gold. 
 Blessers can bless you for a small fee, protecting you from devastating losses upon death. 

 id="file23242520" filename="blessings_and_benedictions.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.faithandworship.com/blessings_and_benedictions.html">
 Faith & Worship 
 Christian Blessings and Benedictions 
 If you use this resource and would like to help with the cost of its continuing development, then donations are always welcome! 
 Contemporary prayers of blessing 
 The tradition of a blessing or benediction as part of an act of worship has been a part of Jewish worship for generations, and we can trace it back to the book of Numbers where Aaron and his sons bless the Israelites with this blessing : 
 “The Lord bless you and keep you; the Lord make his face shine on you and be gracious to you; the Lord turn his face toward you and give you peace.   (Numbers 6:24-26) 
 Interestingly this is apparently the oldest known Biblical text that has been found; amulets with these verses written on them have been found in graves in dating from the First Temple Period, and are now in the Israel Museum, Jerusalem. 
 Below are some contemporary blessings that I have written for use in worship. If reproduced, I'd appreciate an acknowledgement. 
 May the love of the Father, the tenderness of the Son, and the presence of the Spirit, gladden your heart and bring peace to your soul, this day and all days, Amen. 
 May God the Father prepare your journey, Jesus the Son guide your footsteps, The Spirit of Life strengthen your body, The Three in One watch over you, on every road that you may follow. 
 May the peace of God enfold us, The love of God uphold us, The wisdom of God control us. 
 Let the majesty of the Father be the light by which you walk, the compassion of the Son be the love by which you walk, the presence of the Spirit be the power by which you walk. 
 May the peace of God reign in this place and the love of God forever hold you tight, May the Spirit of God flow through your life and the joy of God uphold you day and night. 
 The love of God be the passion in your heart. The joy of God your strength when times are hard . The presence of God a peace that overflows. The Word of God the seed that you might sow. 
 The embrace of the Father Be the comfort you desire. The name of the Son Be the one on whom you rely. The presence of the Spirit Be with you every hour. The Three in One Be the focus of all you are. 
 May the beauty of God be reflected in your eyes, the love of God be reflected in your hands, the wisdom of God be reflected in your words, and the knowledge of God flow from your heart, that all might see, and seeing, believe 
 The peace of God be in your heart The grace of God be in your words The love of God be in your hands The joy of God be in your soul and in the song that your life sings. 
 God’s love surround you, God’s Spirit guide you, God’s whisper cheer you, God’s peace calm you, God’s shield protect you, God’s wisdom arm you, wherever God may lead you. May God’s Spirit surround you, and those whom you love. Rest now, in that calm embrace, let your hearts be warmed and all storms be stilled by the whisper of his voice. May your day be blessed by moments of quietness, light in your darkness, strength in your weakness, grace in your meekness, joy in your gladness, peace in your stillness. May your day be blessed 
 In anxiety may you find peace In sadness may you find comfort In sickness may you find healing In loneliness may you find company In busyness may you find space In listening may you find wisdom In following may you find hope In the One who meets our needs Who says, ‘Ask and you will receive.’ 
 May the love of Christ be active in your heart, be heard in your words, be seen in your actions and inform your choices today and all days. Amen. 
 May the riches of God’s blessing never become a thing of pride but an overflowing well of giving daily shared both far and wide 
 May the knowledge of God’s presence be your strength throughout this day, a source of wisdom, love, light, and grace. And as darkness falls may you find peace in that presence, and the gift of sleep. 
 May our hearts sing of love pouring out upon a tree. May our hearts sing of peace that can calm an angry sea. May our hearts sing of joy in forgiveness, grace, mercy. May our hearts sing of faith in a God who sets us free. May our hearts sing of life lived well and abundantly. May our hearts sing, always. 
 May you find peace in your busyness, in your journeying, in your happiness, in your suffering, in your fearfulness, in your questioning, in your faithfulness, in your worshipping. May you find peace. 
 God’s arms enfold and protect you. God’s word inform and inspire you. God’s love infuse and transform you. God’s Spirit flow and empower you now and always. 
 God of rising sun, embrace us God of mist and rain, refresh us God of flowing stream, revive us God of gentle breeze, speak to us God of day and night-time, hear us God of tears and laughter, bless us God of love and power, uphold us Your children and our family, we pray 
 God’s wisdom be the store from where our daily thoughts are gathered. God’s love be a flowing river bringing peace to heart and soul. God’s whisper be a word in time breaking through this world’s clamour. God’s faithfulness be our strength and hope within the storms we face. 
 God’s peace be known deep within your soul when anxiety and fear assail you, when daily life becomes a burden that is difficult to carry. God’s peace be known and felt, as those arms reach out to hold you. God’s peace be known and heard, in words of comfort and release. God’s peace be known. 
 May the God of love surround you, those loving arms embrace you, bring you comfort, hope and light. And as the day draws to a close God’s peace permeate your heart, and bring healing through the night. 
 In the busyness of life may you find space. In the worries of life may you find peace. In the beauty of life may you find joy. In the sorrows of life may you find comfort, faith be strengthened and your day be blessed. 
 In every moment of this day May you know the embrace of God’s love May you hear the whisper of God’s voice May you feel the presence of God’s Spirit May you share the knowledge of God’s grace in every moment of this day 

 id="file23242543" filename="blessings-for-priests" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.catholicexorcism.org/blessings-for-priests">
 Blessing of Candles 
 Light this candle when you sense an evil presence or manifestation in a certain place. The light from blessed candles symbolizes Jesus, the Light of the world; the presence of the Lord drives away all spirits of darkness. Lighting this candle, then praying for liberation is especially effective to purge a place especially a room, from infestation. V. Our help is in the + name of the Lord. 
 R. Who made heaven and earth. V. The Lord be with you. 
 R. And with your spirit. V. O candles, I exorcise you in the name of God + the Father Almighty, in the name of Jesus + Christ his Son, our Lord, and in the name of the Holy + Spirit. May God uproot and cast out from these objects, all power of the devil, all attacks of the unclean spirit, and all deceptions of Satan, so that they may bring health of mind and body to all who use them. We ask this through the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is coming to judge both the living and the dead and the world by fire. 
 R. Amen. 
 V. Let us pray. Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, light of everlasting life, you have given us candles to dispel the darkness. We humbly implore you now to bless + these candles at our lowly request, and hallow + them by the light of your grace. By the power of the Holy + Cross, endow them with a heavenly blessing. May the blessing they receive be so powerful that, wherever they are placed or lighted, the princes of darkness shall flee in fear, along with all their legions, and never more dare to disturb those who serve you, the almighty God. Let the entire building in which these candles are kept, be free from the power of the adversary, and be defended from the snares of the enemy. Grant we pray, that those who will use these candles may be protected from every assault of the evil spirit, and be safeguarded from all danger. Through Christ our Lord. 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 All: Who made heaven and earth. 
 P: The Lord be with you. 
 Let us pray. Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, bless + these candles at our supplication. By the power of the holy + cross, pour out upon them a heavenly blessing, O Lord, who gave them to human kind in order to repel the darkness. From this signing with the holy + cross may they receive such blessing that, wherever they are set up or lighted, the princes of darkness may begin to tremble and depart, may flee in fear with all their ministers from such dwelling places, and may not dare again to disquiet or molest those who serve you, almighty God, who live and reign forever and ever. 
 Apostolic Blessing - English 
 The pastor or other priest who assists the sick person should vest in surplice and violet stole. Upon entering the room of the sick person, he says: 
 V. Peace to this house. 
 R. And to all who dwell therein. 
 If the sick person wishes to confess his sins, the priest hears his confession and absolves him. If not, the priest urges him to make an act of contrition and, if time permits, instructs him briefly concerning the efficacy and power of this blessing. Then he explains and urges that he should call upon the holy name of Jesus, at least in his heart, and willingly bear the discomforts and pains of sickness in expiation for his past life. The sick person should offer himself to God as prepared to accept whatever is pleasing to God to undergo death itself with resignation as satisfaction for the punishments which his sins deserve. 
 Then the priest offers words of spiritual consolation to the sick person and stirs up in him the hope that he will receive forgiveness of his sins and attain everlasting lifethrough the goodness of almighty God. 
 Then the priest says: 
 V. Our help is in the name of the Lord 
 R. Who made heaven and earth 
 Antiphon: O Lord do not remember the sins of your servant: do not exact punishment for his (her) sins. 
 Most loving God, Father of mercy and God of all consolation, you will that no one who believes and hopes in you should be lost. Look with favor in your great mercy upon this your servant N., whom true faith and Christian hope commend to you. Come to him (her) with saving power, and through the passion and death of your only-begotten Son, grant him (her) in your mercy remission and pardon for all his (her) sins. At the hour of death may his (her) soul find you a forgiving judge and, washed of every stain in the blood of your Son, deserve to pass to life eternal. Through the same Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen. 
 Then after the Confiteor has been said by a cleric, the priest says: Misereatur and Indulgentiam. Next he says: 
 May our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, who gave the power of binding and loosing to blessed Peter his apostle, accept your confession in his most loving mercy and restore to you the white garment which you received at Baptism. And I, through the faculty given to me by the Apostolic See, grant to you a plenary indulgence and remission of all sins. In the name of the Father, and of the Son, + and of the Holy Ghost. 
 R. Amen. 
 Through the sacred mysteries of mankind’s redemption may almighty God forgive you all the punishments of this life and the life to come, open the gates of heaven and lead you to everlasting joys. 
 R. Amen. 
 May almighty God bless you, Father, Son + and Holy Spirit. 
 R. Amen. 
 But if the sick person is so close to death that there is no time for the recitation of the Confiteor or the other prayers above, the priest imparts the apostolic blessing immediately, saying: 
 Through the faculty given to me by the Apostolic See, I grant you a plenary indulgence and remission of all sins. In the name of the Father, and of the Son + and of the Holy Spirit. 
 R. Amen. 
 In case of true necessity, it is enough to say: 
 Through the faculty given to me by the Apostolic See, I grant you a plenary indulgence and remission of all sins. In the name of the Father, and of the Son + and of the Holy Spirit. 
 Apostolic Blessing - Latin 
 The pastor or other priest who assists the sick person should vest in surplice and violet stole. Upon entering the room of the sick person, he says: 
 V. Pax huic dómui. 
 R. Et ómnibus habitántibus in ea. 
 If the sick person wishes to confess his sins, the priest hears his confession and absolves him. If not, the priest urges him to make an act of contrition and, if time permits, instructs him briefly concerning the efficacy and power of this blessing. Then he explains and urges that he should call upon the holy name of Jesus, at least in his heart, and willingly bear the discomforts and pains of sickness in expiation for his past life. The sick person should offer himself to God as prepared to accept whatever is pleasing to God to undergo death itself with resignation as satisfaction for the punishments which his sins deserve. 
 Then the priest offers words of spiritual consolation to the sick person and stirs up in him the hope that he will receive forgiveness of his sins and attain everlasting lifethrough the goodness of almighty God. 
 Clementíssime Deus, Pater misericordiárum et Deus totíus consolatiónis, qui néminem vis períre in te in credéntem atque sperántem: secúndum multitúdinem miseratiónum tuárum réspice propítius fámulum tuum N., quem (fámulam tuam N., quam) tibi vera fides et spes christiána comméndant. Vísita eum (eam) in salutári tuo, et per Unigéniti tui passiónem et mortem, ómnium ei delictórum suórum remissiónem et véniam cleménter indúlge: ut eius ánima in hora éxitus sui te iúdicem propitiátum invéniat et, in sánguine eiúsdem Fílii tui ab omni mácula ablúta, transíre ad vitam mereátur perpétuam. Per eúmdem Christum Dóminum nostrum. 
 R. Amen 
 Then after the Confiteor has been said by a cleric, the priest says: Misereatur and Indulgentiam. Next he says: 
 Dóminus noster Iesus Christus, Fílius Dei vivi, qui beáto Petro Apóstolo suo dedit potestátem ligándi atque solvéndi, per suam piíssimam misericórdiam recípiat confessiónem tuam, et restítuat tibi stolam primam, quam in Baptísmate receptísti: et ego, facultáte mihi ab Apostólica Sede tribúta, indulgéntiam plenáriam et remissiónem ómnium peccatórum tibi concédo. In nómine Patris, et Fílii, + et Spíritus Sancti. 
 R. Amen 
 Per sacrosáncta humánae reparatiónis mystéria remíttat tibi omnípotens Deus omnes praeséntis et futúrae vitae poenas, paradísi portas apériat et ad gáudia sempitérna perdúcat. 
 R. Amen. 
 But if the sick person is so close to death that there is no time for the recitation of the Confiteor or the other prayers above, the priest imparts the apostolic blessing immediately, saying: 
 Ego, facultáte mihi ab Apostólica Sede tribúta, indulgéntiam plenáriam et remissiónem ómnium peccatórum tibi concédo. In nómine Patris, et Fílii, + et Spíritus Sancti. 
 R. Amen 
 Per sacrosáncta humánae reparatiónis mystéria remíttat tibi omnípotens Deus omnes praeséntis et futúrae vitae poenas, paradísi portas apériat et ad gáudia sempitérna perdúcat. 
 Blessing of Epiphany Water: On the Eve of Epiphany 
 (Approved by the Congregation of Sacred Rites, Dec. 6, 1890) 
 (This blessing comes from the Orient, where the Church has long emphasized in her celebration of Epiphany the mystery of our Lord's baptism, and by analogy our baptism. This aspect is not neglected in western Christendom, although in practice we have concentrated on the visit of the Magi. Many years before the Latin Rite officially adopted the blessing of Epiphany water, diocesan rituals, notably in lower Italy, had contained such a blessing). 
 1. At the appointed time the celebrant, vested in white cope (if a bishop, the mitre is worn but removed during the prayers), and the deacon and subdeacon, vested in white dalmatic and tunic respectively, come before the altar. They are preceded by acolytes, who carry the processional cross and lighted candles (which are put in their proper place), and by the other clergy. A vessel of water and a container of salt are in readiness in the sanctuary.) 
 First the Litany of the Saints is sung, during which time all kneel. After the invocation "That you grant eternal rest," etc. the celebrant rises and sings the following two invocations, the second in a higher key: 
 V. That you bless + this water. 
 R. We beg you to hear us. 
 V. That you bless + and sanctify + this water 
 R. We beg you to hear us. 
 Then the chanters continue the litany up to and including the last Lord, have mercy. After this the celebrant chants Our Father the rest inaudibly until: 
 All: But deliver us from evil. 
 2. Then the following psalms are sung: 
 ​ 
 P: Give to the Lord, you sons of God, * give to the Lord glory and praise, 
 All: Give to the Lord the glory due His name; * adore the Lord in holy attire. 
 P: The voice of the Lord is over the waters, the God of glory thunders, * the Lord, over vast waters. 
 All: The voice of the Lord is mighty; * the voice of the Lord is majestic. 
 P: The voice of the Lord breaks the cedars, * the Lord breaks the cedars of Lebanon. 
 All: He makes Lebanon leap like a calf * and Sarion like a young wild bull. 
 P: The voice of the Lord strikes fiery flames; the voice of the Lord shakes the desert, * the Lord shakes the wilderness of Cades. 
 All: The voice of the Lord twists the oaks and strips the forests, * and in His temple all say, "Glory!" 
 P: The Lord is enthroned above the flood; * the Lord is enthroned as king forever. 
 All: May the Lord give strength to His people; * may the Lord bless his people with peace. 
 P: Glory be to the Father. 
 All: As it was in the beginning. 
 Psalm 45 
 P: God is our refuge and our strength, * an ever-present help in distress. 
 All: Therefore we fear not, though the earth be shaken and mountains plunge into the depths of the sea; 
 P: Though its waters rage and foam * and the mountains quake at its surging. 
 All: The Lord of hosts is with us; * our stronghold is the God of Jacob. 
 P: There is a stream whose runlets gladden the city of God, * the holy dwelling of the Most High. 
 All: God is in its midst; it shall not be disturbed; * God will help it at the break of dawn. 
 P: Though nations are in turmoil, kingdoms totter, * His voice resounds, the earth melts away; 
 All: The Lord of hosts is with us; * our stronghold is the God of Jacob. 
 P: Come, see the deeds of the Lord, * the astounding things He has wrought on earth. 
 All: He has stopped wars to the end of the earth; * the bow he breaks; He splinters the spears; He burns the shields with fire. 
 P: Desist, and confess that I am God, * exalted among the nations, exalted upon the earth. 
 All: The Lord of hosts is with us; * our stronghold is the God of Jacob. 
 P: Glory be to the Father. 
 All: As it was in the beginning. 
 Psalm 146 
 P: Praise the Lord, for He is good; * sing praise to our God, for He is gracious; it is fitting to praise Him. 
 All: The Lord rebuilds Jerusalem; * the dispersed of Israel He gathers. 
 P: He heals the brokenhearted * and binds up their wounds. 
 All: He tells the number of the stars; * He calls each by name. 
 P: Great is our Lord and mighty in power; * to His wisdom there is no limit. 
 All: The Lord sustains the lowly; * the wicked He casts to the ground. 
 P: Sing to the Lord with thanksgiving; * sing praise with the harp to our God. 
 All: Who covers the heavens with clouds, * who provides rain for the earth; 
 P: Who makes grass sprout on the mountains * and herbs for the service of men; 
 All: Who gives food to the cattle, * and to the young ravens when they cry to Him. 
 P: He delights not in the strength of the steed, * nor is He pleased with the fleetness of men. 
 All: The Lord is pleased with those who fear Him, * with those who hope for His kindness. 
 P: Glory be to the Father. 
 All: As it was in the beginning. 
 The celebrant then chants: 
 Exorcism against Satan and the apostate angels 
 In the name of our Lord Jesus + Christ and by His power, we cast you out, every unclean spirit, every devilish power, every assault of the infernal adversary, every legion, every diabolical group and sect; begone and stay far from the Church of God, from all who are made in the image of God and redeemed by the precious blood of the divine + Lamb. Never again dare, you cunning serpent, to deceive the human race, to persecute the Church of God, nor to strike the chosen of God and to sift them as + wheat. For it is the Most High God who commands you, + He to whom you heretofore in your great pride considered yourself equal; He who desires that all men might be saved and come to the knowledge of truth. God the Father + commands you. God the Son + commands you. God the Holy + Spirit commands you. The majesty of Christ, the eternal Word of God made flesh + commands you; He who for the salvation of our race, the race that was lost through your envy, humbled Himself and became obedient even unto death; He who built His Church upon a solid rock, and proclaimed that the gates of hell should never prevail against her, and that He would remain with her all days, even to the end of the world. The sacred mystery of the cross + commands you, as well as the power of all the mysteries of Christian faith. The exalted Virgin Mary, Mother of God + commands you, who in her lowliness crushed your proud head from the first moment of her Immaculate Conception. The faith of the holy apostles Peter and Paul and the other apostles + commands you. The blood of the martyrs and the devout intercession of all holy men and women commands you. 
 Therefore, accursed dragon and every diabolical legion, we adjure you by the living + God, by the true + God, by the holy + God, by the God who so loved the world that He gave His only-begotten Son, that whoever believes in Him shall not perish but shall have life everlasting; cease your deception of the human race and your giving them to drink of the poison of everlasting damnation; desist from harming the Church and fettering her freedom. Begone Satan, you father and teacher of lies and enemy of mankind. Give place to Christ in whom you found none of your works; give place to the one, holy, Catholic, and apostolic Church, which Christ Himself purchased with His blood. May you be brought low under God's mighty hand. May you tremble and flee as we call upon the holy and awesome name of Jesus, before whom hell quakes, and to whom the virtues, powers, and dominations are subject; whom the cherubim and seraphim praise with unwearied voices, saying: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts! 
 Next the choir sings the following antiphon and canticle: 
 ​ 
 Antiphon: 
 Today the Church is espoused to her heavenly bridegroom, for Christ washes her sins in the Jordan; the Magi hasten with gifts to the regal nuptials; and the guests are gladdened with water made wine, alleluia. 
 Canticle of Zachary 
 Luke 1.68-79 
 P: "Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel! * He has visited His people and brought about its redemption. 
 All: He has raised for us a stronghold of salvation * in the house of David His servant, 
 P: And redeemed the promise He had made * through the mouth of His holy prophets of old-- 
 All: To grant salvation from our foes * and from the hand of all that hate us; 
 P: To deal in mercy with our fathers * and be mindful of His holy covenant, 
 All: Of the oath he had sworn to our father Abraham, * that He would enable us-- 
 P: Rescued from the clutches of our foes--* to worship Him without fear, 
 All: In holiness and observance of the Law, * in His presence, all our days. 
 P: And you, my little one, will be hailed 'Prophet of the Most High'; * for the Lord's precursor you will be to prepare His ways; 
 All: You are to impart to His people knowledge of salvation * through forgiveness of their sins. 
 P: Thanks be to the merciful heart of our God! * a dawning Light from on high will visit us 
 All: To shine upon those who sit in darkness and in the shadowland of death, * and guide our feet into the path of peace." 
 P: Glory be to the Father. 
 All: As it was in the beginning. 
 Or instead of the "Benedictus" the "Magnificat" may be chosen. At the end of the canticle the antiphon given above is repeated. Then the celebrant sings: 
 P: The Lord be with you. 
 All: May He also be with you. 
 ​ 
 Let us pray. 
 God, who on this day revealed your only-begotten Son to all nations by the guidance of a star, grant that we who now know you by faith may finally behold you in your heavenly majesty; through Christ our Lord. 
 All: Amen. 
 Next he blesses the water: 
 From here on the exorcism of salt and the prayer that follows it, the exorcism of water and the two prayers that follow it, the mixing of the salt and water and then the concluding prayer--all of these are the same as the ones used on pp. 395-97. 
 V. Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 R. Who made heaven and earth. 
 ​ 
 The exorcism of salt follows: 
 Thou creature of salt, I purge thee of evil by the living + God, by the true + God, by the holy + God, by the God Who ordered thee through Eliseus, the prophet to be cast into the water to cure its unfruitfulness. Be thou a purified salt for the health of believers, giving soundness of body and soul to all who use thee. In whatever place thou art sprinkled, may phantoms and wickedness, and Satan’s cunning be banished. And let every unclean spirit be repulsed by Him Who shall come to judge the living and dead, and the world by fire. 
 R. Amen. 
 Let us pray. 
 O Almighty, everlasting God! Humbly we implore thy boundless mercy that thou wouldst deign of thy goodness to bless + and sanctify + this creature of salt which thou hast given for the use of mankind. May all that use it find in it a remedy for soul and body. And let everything which it touches or sprinkles be freed from uncleanness and assault from evil spirits. Through our Lord. 
 R. Amen. 
 Exorcism of water: 
 Thou creature of water, I purge thee of evil in the name of God + the Father almighty in the name of Jesus + Christ, His Son, our Lord, and in the power of the Holy + Spirit, that thou mayest be water fit to brace us against the envious foe. Mayest thou be empowered to drive him forth and exile him together with his fallen angels by the power of the selfsame Jesus Christ, our Lord Who shall come to judge the living and the dead, and the world by fire. 
 R. Amen. 
 Let us pray. 
 O God, Who for man’s salvation dost dispense wondrous mysteries with the efficacious sign of water, hearken to our prayer - pouring forth thy benediction + upon this element which we consecrate with manifold purifications. Let this creature serve thee in expelling demons and curing diseases. Whatsoever it sprinkles in the homes of the faithful, be it cleansed and delivered from harm. Let such homes enjoy a spirit of goodness and an air of tranquility freed from baneful and hidden snares. By the sprinkling of this water may everything opposed to the safety and repose of them that dwell therein be banished, so that they may possess the well-being they seek in calling upon thy holy names, and be protected from all peril. Through our Lord. 
 R. Amen. 
 Now salt is thrice put into the water in the form of a cross, saying only once: 
 May this salt and water be mixed together, in the name of the Father + and of the Son + and of the Holy + Spirit. 
 R. Amen. 
 V. The Lord be with you. 
 R. And with thy spirit. 
 Let us pray. 
 Author of invincible strength and king of an unconquerable empire, ever the gloriously triumphant One! Who restrainest the force of the adversary, Who overcomest the fierceness of the devouring enemy, Who valiantly putteth down hostile influences! Prostrate and fearsome we beseech thee, Lord, consider kindly this creature of salt and water, make it honored, and sanctify it with the dew of thy sweetness. Wherever it is sprinkled in thy name, may devilish infection cease, venomous terror be driven afar. But let the presence of the Holy Spirit be ever with us as we implore thy mercy. Through our Lord, Jesus Christ, Thy Son, who liveth and reigneth with thee in unity of the same Holy Spirit, God, eternally. R. Amen. 
 At the end of the blessing the priest sprinkles the people with the blessed water. 
 (Lastly the "Te Deum" is sung (for the "Te Deum" and its oration see Renewal of the Marriage Vows). 
 ​ 
 Te Deum 
 We praise Thee, O God: we acknowledge Thee to be the Lord. 
 All the earth doth worship Thee and the Father everlasting. 
 To Thee all Angels: to Thee the heavens and all the Powers therein. 
 To Thee the Cherubim and Seraphim cry with unceasing voice: 
 R. And let my cry come to Thee. 
 O God, whose mercy is unlimited and whose goodness is inexhaustible, we thank Thee for all that Thou in Thy loving majesty hast given us. We ask that Thou, who always answerest those who pray, may in Thy mercy not abandon them, but prepare them to receive eternal rewards. Through Christ our Lord. 
 Blessing of Holy Water - English 
 The priest, vested in surplice and purple stole, says: 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 All: Who made heaven and earth. 
 ​ 
 Creature of salt, I exorcise you by the living + God, by the true + God, by the holy + God, who through Eliseus the prophet commanded you to be cast into the water and to cure its unfruitfulness. Be made a salt purified for the health of those who believe. Be health of soul and body for all who receive you. May every apparition, wickedness, and cunning of the devil, every unclean spirit depart from wherever you are sprinkled, adjured by him who is to come to judge the living and the dead and the world by fire. 
 R. Amen 
 ​ 
 Let us pray, 
 Almighty everlasting God, humbly we implore your boundless kindness mercifully to bless + this creature of salt which you have given for mankind's use. May it be health of mind and body for all who use it. May whatever is touched or sprinkled with it be free of all uncleanness and every attack of spiritual evil. Through Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen 
 ​ 
 He then exorcises and blesses the water, saying: 
 Creature of water, I exorcise you in the name of God + the Father almighty, and in the name of Jesus Christ, his Son, our Lord, and in the power of the Holy + Spirit, that you may be water purified to escape all the strength of the enemy and able to root out and displace the enemy himself with his apostate angels, through the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is to come to judge the living and the dead and the world by fire. 
 R. Amen 
 ​ 
 Let us pray, 
 O God, for man's salvation you have established the greatest mysteries in the substance of water, be favorable to our petitions and pour out the power of your blessing + upon this element prepared by many purifications. May this your creature, which serves your mysteries, receive the efficacy of divine grace to expel devils and banish disease. In the homes of the faithful and in all other places may anything sprinkled with this water be free from every uncleanness and safe from harm. Let no pestilent spirit or corrupting air dwell therein. May all the hidden snares of the enemy depart. By the sprinkling of this water may anything hostile to the safety and peace of those who dwell therein be banished. And may the well being sought by the invocation of your holy name be protected from all attack. Through Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen 
 ​ 
 He now puts salt into the water in the form of a cross saying: 
 May this salt and water be mingled together in the name of the Father, and of the Son + and of the Holy Spirit. 
 V. The Lord be with you 
 R. And with your spirit. 
 Let us pray, 
 O God, author of unconquered strength and King of an unconquerable empire, forever the glorious conqueror, you restrain the power of the devil, overcome the cruelty of the roaring enemy, attack all hostile wickedness with power. Fearful and humble, we beg and beseech you, Lord, look upon this creature of salt and water with kindness, honor it and make it holy with the dew of your goodness. Where it is sprinkled, may every infection of the unclean spirit cease through the invocation of your holy name, may the terror of the poisonous serpent be driven out, and may the presence of the Holy Spirit be everywhere with us who ask your mercy. Through our Lord Jesus Christ, your Son, who lives and reigns with you in the unity of the Holy Spirit, God, forever, and ever. 
 V. The Lord be with you. 
 O God, by whose word all things are made holy, pour forth your blessing upon + this creature (these creatures). Grant that whoever makes use of it (them) in accordance with your law and your will and with thanksgiving may receive, through the invocation of your holy name, health of body and protection of soul from your providence. Through Christ our Lord. 
 Blessing of Homes - English 
 4. BLESSING OF HOMES 
 ​ 
 Outside of Eastertime 
 ​ 
 A pastor or another priest may wish to sprinkle with holy water a particular home or the homes of the faithful in general. On entering the home he says: 
 P: God's peace be in this home. 
 All: And in all who live here. 
 ​ 
 As he sprinkles the principal room he says: 
 Antiphon: Purify me with hyssop, Lord, and I shall be clean of sin. Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. (Ps. 50.1) Have mercy on me, God, in your great kindness. 
 ​ 
 V. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 
 All: As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen. 
 P: Ant. Purify me with hyssop, Lord, and I shall be clean of sin. Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. 
 P: The Lord be with you. 
 Hear us, holy Lord and Father, almighty everlasting God, and in your goodness send your holy angel from heaven to watch over and protect all who live in this home, to be with them and give them comfort and encouragement; through Christ our Lord. 
 God the Father almighty, we fervently implore you for the sake of this home and its occupants and possessions, that you may bless + and sanctify + them, enriching them by your kindness in every way possible. Pour out on them, Lord, heavenly dew in good measure, as well as an abundance of earthly needs. Mercifully listen to their prayers, and grant that their desires be fulfilled. At our lowly coming be pleased to bless + and sanctify + this home, as you once were pleased to bless the home of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Within these walls let your angels of light preside and stand watch over those who live here; through Christ our Lord. 
 Blessing of Incense 
 V. The Lord be with you. 
 R. And with thy spirit. 
 Accept, O Holy Father, from me, thine unworthy servant this (these) gift/s which I offer in humility to the honor of thy holy name and to thy peerless majesty; as thou didst accept the sacrifice of the just Abel and the same gifts from the hands of the Magi. 
 Creature of incense (and myrrh) I purge you of evil by the Father + almighty, by Jesus + Christ, His Sole-Begotten Son, and by the Holy + Spirit, the Paraclete, that freed from all deceit, evil and cunning of the devil, you may be a saving remedy to men against the snares of the enemy. May trustful souls who use you in their homes or about their person be delivered from danger to soul and body, rejoicing in the possession of every good; through our Lord and Savior’s power and merits, through the intercession of Mary, most holy Virgin Mother of God, of all Saints (and Holy Magi who venerated Christ, the Lord with similar gifts). 
 R. Amen. 
 Blessing of Incense (and Myrrh) 
 O God, thou the invisible and unending One, in the holy and awesome name of thy Son graciously bestow blessing + and power upon this creature (these creatures) incense (and myrrh). Protect them who will have them in their possession from illness, injury, and danger to body and soul, so they can joyously and securely serve thee with zeal in the Church. Who in perfect Trinity livest and reignest God, forever. 
 R. Amen 
 And may the blessing of almighty God, Father +, Son and Holy Spirit descend upon this creature (these creatures) incense (and myrrh), and remain for all time. 
 Blessing of Oil 
 V: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 R: Who made heaven and earth. 
 ​ 
 Exorcism 
 Thou creature of oil, I purge thee of evil, through God + the Father almighty Who made heaven and earth, the sea and all contained therein! Let the adversary’s power, the devil’s legions, and all Satan’s attacks and phantoms be dispelled and driven afar from this oil. May it be to all who use it strength for body and soul, in the name of God, + the Father almighty, and of the Son, + our Lord, Jesus Christ, and of the Holy + Spirit, the Paraclete, and in the love of the selfsame Christ Jesus, our Lord, Who shall come to judge the living and the dead, and the world by fire. 
 V: The Lord be with you. 
 Lord God Almighty! Before thee angelic hosts stand in awe, and we acknowledge their heavenly service! Deign to regard, to bless + and sanctify + this creature of oil which thou hast brought forth from the sap of olives. Thou hast ordained it for anointing the sick, that being restored to health they may give thanks to thee, the living and true God. Grant we beseech thee, that they who will use this oil which we bless + in thy name may be delivered from every suffering, every illness, and all snares of the enemy, and that all adversity may be averted from thy creatures. For they were redeemed by the Precious Blood of thy Son, to suffer no more the sting of the ancient serpent. Through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, Who liveth and reigneth with thee in the unity of the Holy Spirit, God, eternally. 
 Blessing of Rosaries Short Form - English 
 (Approved by the Congregation of Sacred Rites on November 23, 1918) 
 To the honor and glory of the Virgin Mary, Mother of God, and in the memory of the mysteries of the life, death, and Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ may these rosaries be blessed + and sanctified. + In the name of the Father, and of the Son, + and of the Holy Spirit. 
 Blessing of Salt 
 The priest, vested in surplice and purple stole, says: 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 All: Who made heaven and earth. 
 2. The exorcism of salt follows: 
 God's creature, salt, I cast out the demon from you by the living + God, by the true + God, by the holy + God, by God who ordered you to be thrown into the water- spring by Eliseus to heal it of its barrenness. May you be a purified salt, a means of health for those who believe, a medicine for body and soul for all who make use of you. May all evil fancies of the foul fiend, his malice and cunning, be driven afar from the place where you are sprinkled. And let every unclean spirit be repulsed by Him who is coming to judge both the living and the dead and the world by fire. 
 All: Amen. 
 ​ 
 Let us pray. 
 Almighty everlasting God, we humbly appeal to your mercy and goodness to graciously bless + this creature, salt, which you have given for mankind's use. May all who use it find in it a remedy for body and mind. And may everything that it touches or sprinkles be freed from uncleanness and any influence of the evil spirit; through Christ our Lord. 
 Blessing of St. Benedict Medals - English 
 V. Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 R. Who made heaven and earth. 
 I purge you medals of evil by God + the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth and of the sea and of all that they contain. O every power of the adversary, every cohort of the devil, every attack and appearance of Satan get thee out of these medals and fly afar! And may they become for all who will use them a help for body and soul, in the name of the Father + Almighty, in the name of Jesus + Christ, His Son, our Lord, in the name of the Holy + Spirit, the Paraclete, and in the love of the selfsame Lord Jesus Christ, Who shall come to judge the living and the dead and the world by fire. 
 V. The Lord be with you. 
 Almighty God, lavish Dispenser of every good, we thy suppliants pray that, by the intercession of St. Benedict, thou wouldst pour out thy blessing + on these sacred medals. Let all who will wear them with minds intent on good works deserve to obtain health of body and spirit, the grace of making progress in holiness, as well as the indulgences which have been granted (to us). And may they seek to avoid by thy merciful help every onslaught and fraud of the devil, and finally stand before thee sinless and holy. Through Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen. 
 They are sprinkled with holy water. 
 (Weller, Vol. II, p. 359) 
 (Parish Ritual, appendix p. 13) 
 (More about the Benedict Medal in Resources tab under "Links to Other Websites") 
 Disposing of Cursed Objects 
 ​ 
 1. Bless the object with Holy Water, saying: 
 In the name of the + Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. Amen. 
 ​ 
 2. Cut the unholy ties links and bondages between the object and evil sources and spirits through the Prayer of Breaking of Unholy Ties. 
 In the Name of + Jesus, I break any unholy ties, links, relationships, and bondages between _____(name the object) and all evils sources and spirits. (3x) 
 And I command all spirits associated with these unholy ties, links, bondages to go immediately and directly to the foot of the cross of the Lord Jesus. 
 ​ 
 3. Pray the following prayer over the item (If married, pray this together with your spouse if possible): 
 Father in heaven, we ask You to bind and cast away from me (us) and my (our) entire family and all those who have come into contact with these materials any demonic entities that may have been attached to these materials. We plead the blood of Jesus over these materials and take back any ground the Evil One may have snatched from me (us) because of the presence of these materials in my (our) home. Strengthen, O Lord, the hedge of protection around me (each of us) and my (our) family. Bless me (us) and my (our) family, O Lord. Help us to love You more. I (we) also ask that You be with the person who gave me (us) these materials and free them from any bondage. Help them to understand Your ways and bless them. I (We) ask these things with the intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God, blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, Blessed Archangels Sts. Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael, St. Joseph, St. Nicholas, St. Dominic, and NN. (Patron Saint/s), my (our) Guardian Angel(s), and all the Saints and Angels of Heaven, and powerful in the Holy and Mighty name of Your Son, Jesus + Christ, who name causes hell to tremble. Amen. 
 ​ 
 4. Then destroy the object so that it no longer resembles what it was. If it can be burned, then burn it. If it is glass, break it up into pieces. If it is metal break it in half if possible or other damage it with a hammer perhaps. If it is made of wood, saw it in two, and if of some other material, rip it apart into small pieces, take it apart or damage it as best you can. If there is no way to destroy it, then tie a blessed palm branch on it, or a blessed St. Benedict on it. 
 ​ 
 5. If burying the object is possible, dig a hole in the ground and place the remains of the object in the hole. Sprinkle the remains with holy Water once more. Then tie or place a blessed St. Benedict medal on top of the remains if not already done in step 4. Fill the hole burying the remains of the object. If the item is biodegradable and will not pollute, discarding it in a running river or stream may also be done. 
 ​ 
 6. With the object buried (or discarded in a river or stream), bless yourself with Holy Water and the Sign of the Cross, say an Our Father, and three Hail Marys. 
 ​ 
 7. Pray the following prayer to break any curses that may have attached to you by possessing this object (if married, each spouse is to pray this prayer separately): 
 In the name of the Lord Jesus + Christ, strengthened by the intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God, of St. Joseph, of Blessed Archangels Sts. Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael, of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, St. Nicholas, and St. Dominic, NN. (Patron Saint/s), my Guardian Angel and all the Saints, and powerful in the holy authority of His Precious and Wondrous Name, I ask, O Lord God, that You break and dissolve any and all curses, hexes, spells, seals, satanic vows and pacts, spiritual bondings and soul ties with satanic forces, evil wishes, evil desires, hereditary seals, snares, traps, lies, obstacles, deceptions, diversions, spiritual influences, and every dysfunction and disease from any source whatsoever, that have been placed upon me. Father in Heaven, please rebuke these evil spirits and their effects and cast them away from me so that I may continue to do Your Will and fulfill the mission You have for us to Your Greater Glory. 
 ​ 
 Thank You, Father, for hearing my (our) prayer. I (We) praise Your Holy Name and worship You and Love You. Thank You for the wisdom and light of Your Holy Spirit. Thank You for enabling me (us) through Your Holy Spirit to be aggressive against the works of the enemy. Thank You for Your Hope that takes away discouragement; thank You for ongoing victory. “...in all of these things we are more than conquerors through Him who loved us  (Romans 8:37). Father, I (we) now place my (our) enemies into Your hands. Look with mercy upon them, and do not hold their sins against them. Anyone who has cursed me (us), I (we) now bless. Anyone who has hurt me (us), I (we) now forgive. For those who have persecuted me (us), I (we) now pray: 
 Our Father…, Hail Mary…, Glory Be… 
 O My Sweet Jesus, forgive us our sins and save us from the fires of Hell. Lead all souls to Heaven, and help especially those who are most in need of Your Mercy. 
 Saint Michael the Archangel, defend us in battle…. 
 ​ 
 8. Renounce your involvement in these things occultic, and/or your ownership of the items and take back the ground Satan stole as a result of your sin or in even the mere ownership of the object (if married, each spouse is to pray this prayer separately): 
 Dear Heavenly Father, strengthened by the intercession of the Most Immaculate Mother of Our God, the Blessed Virgin Mary, of St. Joseph, of Blessed Archangels Sts. Michael, Gabriel and Raphael, of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, St. Nicholas, St. Dominic, NN. (Patron Saint/s) my Guardian Angel and all the Saints, and Angels in Heaven, and powerful in the holy authority of His name, I cancel all ground that evil spirits have gained in my life and in the lives of my family through my willful involvement in sin (or, have gained by my ownership of ______ [name object]). I reclaim that ground and my life for Christ. 
 R. Amen. 
 ​ 
 9. If sin was committed (in using the object), then confess that in the Sacrament of Reconciliation. 
 10. At your earliest opportunity go to Mass and offer your life, family and property to God. 
 Solemn Blessing of a Cross 
 V. The Lord be with you. 
 R. And with thy spirit. 
 O Holy Lord, almighty Father, eternal God, bless † this cross that it be a saving help to mankind. Let it be a bulwark of faith, an encouragement to good works, the redemption of souls; and may it be consolation, protection, and a shield against the cruel darts of the enemy. Through Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen. 
 Let us pray. 
 Bless, + O Lord Jesus Christ this cross by which thou hast snatched the world from Satan’s grasp and upon which thou hast overcome by thy suffering him, who is the prompter of sin, who rejoiced in Adam’s deception at the accursed tree of Paradise. Here it is sprinkled with holy water. May this symbol of salvation be sanctified in the name of the Father, + and of the Son, + and of the Holy + Spirit, and may all who kneel and pray before this cross for our Lord’s honor receive health of body and soul. Through the selfsame Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen. 
 After this the priest, kneeling before the crucifix, devoutly venerates and kisses it, and others may do likewise. 
 Solemn Blessing of an Image Jesus Christ, the Blessed Mother, or Any Saint 
 If such images are exposed for public veneration they should be solemnly blessed. 
 P. The Lord be with you. 
 Almighty everlasting God, who does not forbid us to carve or paint likenesses of your saints, in order that whenever we look at them with our bodily eyes we may call to mind their holy lives, and resolve to follow in their footsteps; may it please you to bless + and to hallow + this statue (or picture), which has been made in memory and honor of your only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ (or the blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ), (or blessed N., your apostle, or martyr, or pontiff, or confessor, or virgin). And grant that all who in its presence pay devout homage to your only-begotten Son (or the blessed Virgin, or the glorious apostle, or martyr, or pontiff, or confessor, or virgin) may by His (or her) merits (and intercession) obtain your grace in this life and everlasting glory in the life to come; through Christ our Lord. 
 Blessing and Investiture of Scapulars 
 Prayer of the Blessing 11. The priest or deacon, with arms outstretched, says this prayer of blessing. O God, author and perfection of holiness, who call those who were born of water and the Holy Spirit to the fullness of the Christian life, look with kindness on those who are about to receive devoutly the Scapular of Carmel which they will wear faithfully as the sign of their commitment to the Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel. Grant that in surrendering to the love of the most tender Virgin, they may conform themselves to the image of Jesus Christ your Son, and having run the course of this life happily, may they enter into the joy of your house. Through Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen The priest or deacon then sprinkles the scapular with holy water. 
 Enrollment in the Scapular 12. The officiant then places the Scapular on each faithful who has requested it, and says: Receive this Scapular. (Through this Scapular you become a member of the Confraternity of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel.) Full of faith in the love of such a great Mother, dedicate yourself to imitating her and to a special relationship with her. Wear this sign as a reminder of the presence of Mary in your daily commitment to be clothed in Jesus Christ and to manifest him in your life for the good of the Church and the whole of humanity, and to the glory of the Most Blessed Trinity. 
 R. Amen. 13. If deemed more appropriate, when there are many persons to be enrolled in the Scapular, the officiant may say the form of enrollment once only. Then all together answer Amen and approach the officiant to receive the Scapular. 14. After enrollment, the officiant addresses all in these words: Having received the Scapular, you have been received into the family of Carmel, consecrated in a special way to the imitation and service of the Virgin Mother of God, that you may live for Christ and his Church in the contemplative and apostolic spirit of the Order of Carmel. And that you may be able to follow this ideal perfectly, by the faculties entrusted to me, I admit you to participate in all the spiritual benefits of the Order of Carmel. 15. After explaining briefly and clearly the commitment and obligations involved in being admitted institutionally to the Carmelite family, the officiant closes the rite with a solemn blessing. 
 ​ 
 May almighty God bless + us, keep us from all evil and lead us to eternal life. R. Amen. 17. The celebration may end with an appropriate hymn to Our Lady, for instance, Flos Carmeli, Salve Regina, Sub tuum praesidium. 
 Taken from the Rite for the Blessing of and Enrolment in the Scapular of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel 

 id="file23242539" filename="blessings-for-salt-water-oil-your-house" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://getridofghosts.org/blessings-for-salt-water-oil-your-house/">
 Blessings for Salt, Water, Oil, Chalk, Candles 
 I am often asked, “Why do you advocate the use of ‘only’ exorcised salt, water and oil. Why not ‘simply blessed’ or ‘anointed’?  I use them for exorcism because the “exorcised  salt, water and oil cannot be ‘co-opted’ for use in other, “Non  or “Semi  Christian rituals. There would be no reason or desire for anyone dealing with demonic or negative entities to use something which carries an exorcism blessing within it. By it’s very nature, after being exorcised, anyone wanting to use it for any purpose than to glorify God would not even touch it without extreme discomfort, nor would they want to be anywhere near it. It cannot be used in rituals to summon entities or curse objects or any number of other nefarious practices. It is safe and it is what it is, God’s weapon against the darkness and evil. 
 Ordinary holy, blessed or anointed salt, water and oil have been used by practitioners of other religions or belief systems in rituals or other practices all over the world as Catholicism was evangelized. Those practitioners that emanate from positive religions or systems use these items with respect, but those that are not operating with positive intention are able to utilize these items for many other ‘interpretative’ reasons and purposes that may be very dark indeed. Not everyone welcomed the Church and many practitioners of pagan beliefs utilized these very sacramentals against the Church or it’s influence. Perhaps they believed that by using them to pursue their own desires negated the influence of the Church by defiling the sacramentals themselves. I don’t really know what they were thinking, but I do know the power of true Christian prayer over these sacramentals and how it changes the crystalline structure of water, in particular. I don’t believe they can actually negate the holiness of blessed water unless they do another ritual to accomplish their goals. But I do know that once the exorcism blessing is prayed over holy water, oil and salt, the structure of God’s power cannot be manipulated or negated. 
 Exorcised salt, water and oil exorcised by a truly Apostolic hands-on ordained minister, pastor or priest carries a firm exorcism blessing and cannot be manipulated to do anything else but exorcise that which is contrary or offensive to God. 
 I would suggest that you “print this page  and take it with you to your pastor, minister or priest if you want these blessings said over your water, oil, salt and chalk. They do not always have these prayers readily at hand and will usually only pray the normal blessing instead. Even though these prayers were first written formally by the Roman Catholic Church, any ordained minister may use these prayers, as they were originated by the early church fathers for apostolic use. The + sign means making the sign of the cross with your right hand in the air or your thumb when applying to a surface, including the body. 
 Blessing and Exorcism Prayers for Salt, Water, Oil, Chalk and Candles Sacramentals in both English and Latin: 
 (Chalk blessing may be used for washable crayons and markers as well) (All Exorcism prayers are taken verbatim from the old, pre Vatican II, Roman Catholic “Rituale Romanum  prayer book, thoughtfully placed online in the EWTN Library.) 
 EXORCISM OF SALT IN ENGLISH (Exorcised Salt is necessary for the Exorcism of Water) 
 O salt, creature of God, I exorcize you by the living (+) God, by the true (+) God, by the holy (+) God, by the God who ordered you to be poured into the water by Elisha the prophet, so that its life-giving powers might be restored. I exorcize you so that you may become a means of salvation for believers, that you may bring health of soul and body to all who make use of you, and that you may put to flight and drive away from the places where you are sprinkled; every apparition, villainy, turn of devilish deceit, and every unclean spirit; adjured by him who will come to judge the living and the dead and the world by fire. Amen 
 Almighty and everlasting God, we humbly implore you, in your immeasurable kindness and love, to bless (+) this salt which you created and gave to the use of mankind, so that it may become a source of health for the minds and bodies of all who make use of it. May it rid whatever it touches or sprinkles of all uncleanness, and protect it from every assault of evil spirits. Through Christ our Lord. Amen 
 EXORCISM OF SALT IN LATIN: V Adjutórium nostrum in nómine Dómini. Qui fecit caelum et terram. Deinde absolute incipit exorcismum salis 
 Exorzio te, creatura salis, per Deum + vivum, per Deum + verum, per Deum + sanctum, per Deum, qui te per Eliseum Prophetam in aquam mitti jussit, ut sanaretur sterilitas aquae: ut efficiaris sal exorcizatum in salutem credentium; et sis ómnibus sumentibus te sanitas animae et córporis; et effugiat, atque discedat a loco, in quo aspersum fueris, omnis phantasia, et nequitia, vel versutia diabólicae fraudis, omnisque spiritus immundus, adjuratus per eum, qui venturus est judicare vivos et mórtuos, et saeculum per ignem. Amen 
 Oratio: 
 Oremus. Immensam clementiam tuam, omnipotens aeterne Deus, humiliter imploramus, ut hanc creaturarn salis, quam in usum generis humani tribuisti, bene+dicere et sancti+ficare tua pietate digneris: ut sit ómnibus sumentibus salus mentis et córporis; et quidquid ex eo tactum veI respersum fuerit, careat omni immunditia, omnique impugnatióne spiritalis nequitiae. Per Dóminum nostrum Jesum Christum, qui tecum vivit et regnat in unitate Spiritu Sancti Deus per omnia secula seculorum. Amen 
 EXORCISM OF WATER IN ENGLISH 
 O water, creature of God, I exorcize you in the name of God the Father (+) Almighty, and in the name of Jesus (+) Christ His Son, our Lord, and in the power of the Holy (+) Spirit. I exorcize you so that you may put to flight all the power of the enemy, and be able to root out and supplant that enemy with his apostate angels, through the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, who will come to judge the living and the dead and the world by fire. Amen. 
 O God, for the salvation of mankind, you built your greatest mysteries on this substance, water. In your kindness, hear our prayers and pour down the power of your blessing (+) into this element, made ready for many kinds of purifications. May this, your creature, become an agent of divine grace in the service of your mysteries, to drive away evil spirits and dispel sickness, so that everything in the homes and other buildings of the faithful that is sprinkled with this water, may be rid of all uncleanness and freed from every harm. Let no breath of infection and no disease-bearing air remain in these places. May the wiles of the lurking enemy prove of no avail. Let whatever might menace the safety and peace of those who live here be put to flight by the sprinkling of this water, so that the health obtained by calling upon your holy name, may be made secure against all attack. Through Christ our Lord. Amen 
 (Pour exorcised salt into the water, in the form of a cross) 
 May a mixture of salt and water now be made, in the name of the Father, and of the (+) Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen. 
 O God, Creator unconquerable, invincible King, Victor ever glorious, you hold in check the forces bent on dominating us. You overcome the cruelty of the raging enemy, and in your power you beat down the wicked foe. Humbly and fearfully do we pray to you, O Lord, and we ask you to look with favor on this salt and water which you created. Shine on it with the light of your kindness. Sanctify it by the dew of your love, so that, through the invocation of your holy name, wherever this water and salt is sprinkled, it may turn aside every attack of the unclean spirit, and dispel the terrors of the poisonous serpent. And wherever we may be, make the Holy Spirit present to us, who now implore your mercy. Through Christ our Lord. Amen. EXORCISM OF WATER IN LATIN 
 Exorcismus aquae: et dicitur absolute: 
 Exorcizo te, creatura aquae, in nómine Dei + Patris omnipótentis, et in nómine Jesu + Christi Filii ejus Dómini nostri, et in virtute Spiritus + Sancti: ut fias aqua exorcizata ad effugandam omnem potestatem inimici, et ipsum inimicum eradicare et explantare valeas cum angelis suis apostaticis per virtutem ejusdem Dómini nostri Jesu Christi: qui venturus est judicare vivos et mórtuos, et saeculum per ignem. Amen 
 Oratio 
 Oremus Deus, qui ad salutem humani generis, maxima quaeque sacramenta in aquarum substantia condidisti: adesto propitius invocatiónibus nostris, et elemento huic multimodis purificatiónibus praeparato, virtutem tuae bene+dictiónibus infunde: ut creatura tua, mysteriis tuis serviens, ad abigendos daemones, morbósque pellendos, divinae gratiae sumat effectum; ut quidquid in dómibus, vel in locis fidelium, haec unda resperserit, careat omni immunditia, Iiberetur a noxa: non illic resideat spiritus pestilens, non aura corrumpens: discedant omnes insidiae latentis inimici; et si quid est, quod aut incolumitati habitantium invidet, aut quieti, aspersióne hujus aquae effugiat: ut salubritas per invocationem sancti tui nóminis expetita, ab ómnibus sit impugnatiónibus defensa. Per Dóminum nostrum Jesum Christum, qui tecum vivit et regnat in unitate Spiritu Sancti Deus per omnia secula seculorum. Amen 
 Hic ter mittat sal in aquam in modum crucis, dicendo semel:Commixtio salis et aquae pariter fiat, in nómine Pa+tris, et Fi+lii, et Spiritus + Sancti. R. Amen. V Dóminus vobiscum. R.. Et cum spiritu tuo. 
 EXORCISM BLESSING FOR OIL IN ENGLISH (Use 100% pure Olive oil) 
 O oil, creature of God, I exorcize you by God the Father (+) almighty, who made heaven and earth and sea, and all that they contain. Let the adversary’s power, the devil’s legions, and all of Satan’s attacks and machinations be dispelled and driven far from this creature, oil. Let it bring health in body and mind to all who use it, in the name of God (+) the Father almighty, and of our Lord Jesus (+) Christ, His Son, and of the Holy (+) Spirit, as well as in the love of the same Jesus Christ our Lord, who is coming to judge both the living and the dead and the world by fire. 
 Lord God almighty, before whom the hosts of angels stand in awe, and whose heavenly service we acknowledge; may it please you to regard favorably and to bless (+) and hallow (+) this creature, oil, which by your power has been pressed from the juice of olives. You have ordained it for anointing the sick, so that, when they are made well, they may give thanks to you, the living and true God. Grant we pray, that those who will use this oil, which we are blessing (+) in your name, may be protected from every attack of the unclean spirit, and be delivered from all suffering, all infirmity, and all wiles of the enemy. Let it be a means of averting any kind of adversity from man, redeemed by the precious blood of your Son, so that he may never again suffer the sting of the ancient serpent. Through Christ our Lord. Amen. 
 (Priest sprinkles the oil with holy water) EXORCISM OF OIL IN LATIN 
 BENEDICTIO OLEI 
 Adjutótium nostrum in nómine Dómini. R. Qui fecit caelum et terram.Exorcismus Exorcizo te, creatura ólei, per Deum + Patrem omnipotentem, qui fecit caelum et terram, mare, et ómnia, quae in eis sunt. Omnis virtus adversarii, omnis exercitus diaboli, et omnis incursus, omne phantasma satanae eradicare, et effugare ab hac creatura ólei, ut fiat ómnibus, qui eo usuri sunt, salus mentis et córporis, in nómine Dei + Patris mnipotentis, et Jesu + Christi Filii ejus Dómini nostri, et Spiritus + Sancti Paracliti, et in caritate ejusdem Dómini nostri Jesu Christi, qui venturus est judicare vivos et mórtuos, et saeculum per ignem. Amen. 
 Oratio: 
 Oremus. Dómine Deus omnipotens, cui astat exercitus Angelórum cum tremóre, quorum servitium spirituale cognóscitur, dignare respicere, bene+dicere, et sancti+ficare hanc creaturam ólei, quam ex olivarum succo eduxisti, et ex eo infirmos inungi mandasti, quatenus sanitate percepta, tibi Deo vivo et vero gratias agerent: praesta, quaesumus; ut hi, qui hoc óleo, quod in tuo nómine bene+dicimus, usi fuerint, ab omni languóre, omnique infirmitate, atque cunctis insidiis inimici liberentur, et cunctae adversitates separentur a plasmate tuo, quod pretióso sanguine Filii tui redemisti, ut numquam laedatur a morsu antiqui serpentis. Per eumdem Dóminum nostrum Jesum Christum Filium tuum: Qui tecum vivit et regnat in unitate Spiritus Sancti Deus, per ómnia saecula saeculórum. Amen 
 EXORCISM BLESSING FOR CANDLES: 
 (Priest vests in surplice and purple stole) 
 Our help is in the name of the Lord. R. Who made heaven and earth. 
 P: The Lord be with you. R: May He also be with you. 
 P: O candles, I exorcise you in the name of God (+) the Father Almighty, in the name of Jesus (+) Christ his Son, our Lord, and in the name of the Holy (+) Spirit. May God uproot and cast out from these objects, all power of the devil, all attacks of the unclean spirit, and all deceptions of Satan, so that they may bring health of mind and body to all who use them. We ask this through the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is coming to judge both the living and the dead and the world by fire. 
 R: Amen 
 ORDINARY BLESSING FOR CANDLES: 
 Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, bless these candles at our lowly request. Endow them, Lord, by the power of the Holy (+) Cross, with a blessing from on high, you who gave them to mankind in order to dispel darkness. Let the blessing that they receive from the sign of the holy + cross be so effectual that, wherever they are lighted or placed, the princes of darkness may depart in trembling from all these places, and flee in fear, along with all their legions, and never more dare to disturb or molest those who serve you, the almighty God, who live and reign forever and ever. Amen 
 EPIPHANY BLESSING FOR CHALK TO BLESS YOUR HOME: Also used to bless washable crayons or markers used to Bless Your Home: This blessing is very powerful and will stop all activity from human ghosts in purgatory, or entities other than demons within a circumference of 20 feet of where this blessing is written 
 Chalk for each family is also blessed so that they may mark the names of the three Magi over their doors, as a witness of their faith and protection against evil. This blessing is from the older version of the Roman Ritual. 
 PRAYER: 
 “O Lord God, bless this Thy creature chalk that it may be used for the salvation of the human race. Through the invocation of Thy most Holy Name grant that whoever shall take of this chalk and write with it upon the doors of his house the names of Thy saints, Caspar, Melchior and Balthasar, may through their merits and intercession receive health of body and protection of soul. Through Christ our Lord. Amen.  
 or this prayer may be said: 
 “Loving God, bless this chalk which you have created, that it may be helpful to your people; and grant that through the invocation of your most Holy Name all those who with it write the names of your saints, Caspar, Melchior, and Balthazar, may receive health of body and protection of soul for all who dwell in the homes where this chalk is used, we make this prayer through Jesus the Christ. Amen.  
 The initials of the Magi are then inscribed upon the inside of the doors with the blessed chalk. 
 (The initials, C, M, B, can also be interpreted as the Latin phrase “Christus mansionem benedicat“ which means “Christ bless this house .) This blessing is usually done at Epiphany around the first part of each new year, but can actually be done at any time to bless your home. 
 20 + C + M + B + 16 (the + is the symbol for the sign of the cross) (the 20 and 16 signify the year as this blessing is redone each year. In January of 2016 you will write 20 + C + M + B + 16. 
 Write this inscription on your doors after blessing your home with holy water and saying the House blessing prayer found above. Frankincense may also be used to cense the home before writing the blessing on the doors. (Frankincense is an incense that is placed upon charcoal that has been lit. The smoldering charcoal will cause the incense to smoke, thereby cleansing the home of negativity.) 
 This is a very powerful blessing for your home. Please consider using it on all doors if you have what I call “localized  spirit haunting or incidents that confine themselves to small areas, such as a single room, hallway or stairway. You can, in fact, write this on every door in your home or property if you are unsure of the origin of the activity. 
 Prayers in Latin courtesy of exorcismus.org . Thank you. 

 id="file23242611" filename="Blessings-From-God" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/topics/Blessings-From-God">
 The Lord has been mindful of us; He will bless us; He will bless the house of Israel; He will bless the house of Aaron. 
 Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord, The people whom He has chosen for His own inheritance. 
 For the Lord your God has blessed you in all that you have done; He has known your wanderings through this great wilderness. These forty years the Lord your God has been with you; you have not lacked a thing. ’ 
 He shall receive a blessing from the Lord And righteousness from the God of his salvation. 
 For You make him most blessed forever; You make him joyful with gladness in Your presence. 
 The Lord blessed the latter days of Job more than his beginning; and he had 14,000 sheep and 6,000 camels and 1,000 yoke of oxen and 1,000 female donkeys. 
 Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord; We have blessed you from the house of the Lord. 
 O God, You are awesome from Your sanctuary. The God of Israel Himself gives strength and power to the people. Blessed be God! 
 All these blessings will come upon you and overtake you if you obey the Lord your God: 
 Now therefore, may it please You to bless the house of Your servant, that it may continue forever before You. For You, O Lord God, have spoken; and with Your blessing may the house of Your servant be blessed forever.  
 A Song of Ascents. How blessed is everyone who fears the Lord, Who walks in His ways. 
 “Blessed shall you be when you come in, and blessed shall you be when you go out. 
 the blessing, if you listen to the commandments of the Lord your God, which I am commanding you today; 
 O taste and see that the Lord is good; How blessed is the man who takes refuge in Him! 
 For the choir director. A Psalm of David. How blessed is he who considers the helpless; The Lord will deliver him in a day of trouble. 
 Blessed be the Lord, who daily bears our burden, The God who is our salvation. Selah. 
 His descendants will be mighty on earth; The generation of the upright will be blessed. 
 I will make them and the places around My hill a blessing. And I will cause showers to come down in their season; they will be showers of blessing. 
 He blessed Joseph, and said, “The God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked, The God who has been my shepherd all my life to this day, 
 From the God of your father who helps you, And by the Almighty who blesses you With blessings of heaven above, Blessings of the deep that lies beneath, Blessings of the breasts and of the womb. 
 Blessed is he who reads and those who hear the words of the prophecy, and heed the things which are written in it; for the time is near. 
 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ, 
 But He said, “On the contrary, blessed are those who hear the word of God and observe it.  
 And he said, “Come in, blessed of the Lord! Why do you stand outside since I have prepared the house, and a place for the camels?  
 How blessed are those who dwell in Your house! They are ever praising You. Selah. 
 whom the Lord of hosts has blessed, saying, “Blessed is Egypt My people, and Assyria the work of My hands, and Israel My inheritance.  
 But King Solomon shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall be established before the Lord forever.  
 I know that when I come to you, I will come in the fullness of the blessing of Christ. 
 Daniel said, “Let the name of God be blessed forever and ever, For wisdom and power belong to Him. 
 May the Lord, the God of your fathers, increase you a thousand-fold more than you are and bless you, just as He has promised you! 
 The Lord has greatly blessed my master, so that he has become rich; and He has given him flocks and herds, and silver and gold, and servants and maids, and camels and donkeys. 
 You visit the earth and cause it to overflow; You greatly enrich it; The stream of God is full of water; You prepare their grain, for thus You prepare the earth. 
 Now Isaac sowed in that land and reaped in the same year a hundredfold. And the Lord blessed him, 
 I have also given you what you have not asked, both riches and honor, so that there will not be any among the kings like you all your days. 
 Thus the ark of the Lord remained in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite three months, and the Lord blessed Obed-edom and all his household. 

 id="file23242694" filename="blessings-same-sex-relationships" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.viamedia.news/2021/12/07/blessings-same-sex-relationships/">
 Blessings & Same-Sex Relationships 
 by the Revd Dr Andrew Knight, Vicar of St Mary’s, Diocese of Chester 
 It was the conversation I had been anticipating with some trepidation since beginning my ordained ministry. Two young Christian men, long-term partners, enquiring as to whether the vicar of their welcoming local church, would marry them, or at least bless a civil marriage. By virtue of their ordination, priests are enabled in their ministry to invite God’s blessing upon people, places and objects… from new vocations to homes, bibles to boats, the baptised and bereaved. Yet, the Church of England ties the priest’s hands preventing in any meaningful sense them being able to bless a permanent, faithful and fruitful same-sex relationship. Having negotiated the uncomfortable conversation, where issues of theology and legality sat uneasily alongside the Gospel of love, welcome and reconciliation, this incongruity was amplified days later when a clergy colleague shared how he had joyfully responded to the request to bless a couple of guinea pigs in a pet service… I didn’t ask if they were the same gender?! 
 As priests we pray God’s blessing upon the church to enable it to be a blessing to the world, opening opportunities for divine intimacy and fruitfulness. Withholding blessing has therefore significant consequences for priests, church and community. The crux of the issue is what we believe to be the nature and purpose of ‘blessing’? I believe there are several dimensions to priestly blessing, which I’ll summarise here: 
 Blessing is firstly a prayer. The US Episcopal Church understands the blessing of faithful same-sex relationships as a prayer: to thank God for the grace discerned in the couple’s lives; to ask for God’s continual favour; to manifest the fruits of the Spirit in their lives; and to commission the couple to bear witness to the Gospel. 
 Blessing is also a commissioning: the invocation of the Holy Spirit to guide, empower and enable flourishing in a person’s life and ministry. For example, marriage is a new vocation to a permanent, faithful relationship where a deeper companionship and fruitfulness is commissioned. 
 The Hebrew word for blessing berakhah is thanksgiving, our frequent response to receiving God’s blessing. This celebratory blessing is present in any marriage rite in response to the good gift of relationships. 
 Blessing is pastoral care, originating in domestic settings where the covenantal relationship with God brought wholeness, peace and wellbeing to home and community. The Church in Wales in proposing new blessing liturgy recognised it was “pastorally unsustainable for the Church to make no formal provision for those in same-gender relationships.  
 Blessing is a witness, allowing people to connect faith to their everyday lives. Same-sex couples who seek God’s blessing do not generally do so in order that a relationship can take place, or so they can have sex. Rather it is for them to bear public witness to the gift of their companionship in order to both ask for the community’s support and to seal their commitment under God. 
 Blessings are exhortation – words of power that can elevate and encourage. They, thus are cries of liberation, bringing light, truth and justice into dark places where suffering and discrimination has been hidden. 
 Henri Nouwen’s concept of blessing is generous hospitality, allowing outsiders to connect with and enrich a worshipping community. This blessing requires vulnerability, empathy, authenticity and openness to the Holy Spirit in healing fragmented communities. 
 Blessing as sanctification calls upon the Holy Spirit to transform us, such that we grow into the fullness of the redeemed life. Both heterosexual and homosexual Christian couples recognise the grace of God in their lives, in their mutual joy, love and companionship. 
 As with the eucharistic bread and wine, blessing as consecration establishes a new reality and divine purpose. Through marriage the couple’s lives have a new trajectory and vocation, setting them apart to bear the fruits of, and be a witness to, God’s grace in the world. 
 The language of ‘blessing’, however, becomes highly emotive when used in conjunction with ministry to gay and lesbian couples. In everyday language if someone ‘gives their blessing’ to something, the sense is they ‘approve’. Many may perceive that blessing a same-sex couple is simply public pronouncement of the Church’s approval of a way of life or sexual practice about which they are personally uncertain or reject. The Church communicates its beliefs through its liturgy, and the priest has a liturgical blessing role, encouraging, or essentially giving permission for, a specific movement in mission or ministry. Yet if blessing is withheld from same-sex couples because of a narrower perspective of blessing as ‘expression of doctrine’, we negate its multifaceted richness as I’ve described, and perhaps forget it is not us but Christ that is the source of all blessing. 
 God’s desire to bless is not limited by our human boundaries of sacred and secular. Nevertheless, the Church should recognise there are things we may not bless, such as weapons of war. It is perhaps easier to exclude blessing things which may cause harm, or destroy, or divide, but this is far from the nature of a loving, faithful relationship. A church may teach what kind of relationships might be considered worthy of blessing and which may not. Yet, the question is how do we draw the line, especially when there is limited theological consensus on same-sex unions? 
 We may choose then to bless those things in which we either recognise God’s goodness and potential for fruitfulness, or that can be orientated towards God’s purposes for redemption. If so, by denying a blessing for a same-sex relationship do we suggest that there is no goodness or hope to be found in it? Many heterosexual marriages are far from what we might call ‘good’. Whilst some see the blessing of same-sex couples as abandoning traditional biblical theology of sex and marriage, others would extend it, to include same-sex couples, as a matter of justice, generosity and mercy. Meanwhile, when same-sex couples approach a church, they are not looking for a judgement or teaching document but an empathetic welcome from a church with a human face. The Methodist Church recently asserted “There is a strong case that, if marriage is what the Methodist Church says it is, and is as wonderful as it says it is, this Church cannot remain true to the God of justice and love by continuing to deny it to those same-sex couples who desire it so deeply . 
 Several churches have moved to introduce permissive blessing rites for same-sex couples as a matter of theological and pastoral conscience for priests. I pray that we may not lose the opportunity to be the instruments of God’s blessing, and encourage LGBT Christians to capture the spirit of Jacob, who despite his difficult circumstances and against the odds, hangs on in there, wrestling with the angel until daybreak saying “I will not let you go unless you bless me.  
 8 Responses to Blessings & Same-Sex Relationships 
 … with compassion, encouragement, pastoral care, prayer… and, sadly, signposting to other denominations. 
 Sorry if I am showing my ignorance and happy to be corrected. At this time when the discussion is on the table, surely Andrew’s dilemmas should be presented to parishioners from the pulpit? How else will we all be aware of the current situation in the C of E and feel motivated to respond? I have been informed that clergy are being discouraged from joining local LLF courses … that is, if they decide to offer a course to their parishioners on the grounds that they, as someone who is known and trusted, may inhibit conversations (what does that say?). 
 This premis doesn’t seem to me to be a very good way of facilitating conversations on difficult issues at all levels with transparency, an ethos of learning together and demonstrating a degree of bravery and openness. This willingness to have such discussions with parishioners should be lead by the church’s clergy at all levels. Have all clergy completed the course as part of their professional development? Have they held theological debates and listened to each other? 
 On the couple of guinea pigs, the situation is not analogous, since they are being blessed as individuals not as a pair. 
 Andrew your piece is excellent and I truly hope, prophetic. For 40 years – a biblical wilderness – I have watched the Church of England grow in meanness and duplicity where gay and transgender believers (as well as those beyond church) are concerned. This is no longer sustainable if we claim to have anything to offer to a world which has already moved on. Who wants to seek a God who will only accept them as 2nd-class citizens? Who wants to belong to a church which proclaims that everyone else – apart from you – is unconditionally loved? This is such a scandal to the gospel. But complacency and ‘righteousness’ do not see it that way. I’m retired now but my long-postponed ‘spiritual divorce’ from the C of E (excruciatingly painful at the time) took place earlier this year. My fear is that the LLF process will see yet another generation fobbed off with platitudes and delays. I sincerely hope I shall be proved wrong. But ecclesiastical politics has a reputation for being harsh and chewing up the core of people’s worth and humanity. Jesus would have none of it. We should be thoroughly ashamed of it now. 
 I would argue that a blessing is also apocalyptic, in the literal Greek sense that it unveils God’s action in the world. When I bless a couple I am not adding anything that is not already there, as if it was something magical. No, I am confirming, on behalf of the church, that God’s loving movement is already present in the union of the two people. There may be a change in legal status for the couple, but that that is more of a secular thing that may or may not be true of a religious rite of matrimony. 
 Follow ViaMedia.News posts via Email 
 Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email. 

 id="file23242511" filename="Blessings_-To-Abraham" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/topics/Blessings,-To-Abraham">
 20 Bible Verses about Blessings, To Abraham 
 Most Relevant Verses 
 And I will make you a great nation, And I will bless you, And make your name great; And so you shall be a blessing; And I will bless those who bless you, And the one who curses you I will curse. And in you all the families of the earth will be blessed.  
 Now when Abram was ninety-nine years old, the Lord appeared to Abram and said to him, “I am God Almighty; Walk before Me, and be blameless. “I will establish My covenant between Me and you, And I will multiply you exceedingly.  Abram fell on his face, and God talked with him, saying,read more. “As for Me, behold, My covenant is with you, And you will be the father of a multitude of nations. “No longer shall your name be called Abram, But your name shall be Abraham; For I have made you the father of a multitude of nations. I will make you exceedingly fruitful, and I will make nations of you, and kings will come forth from you. I will establish My covenant between Me and you and your descendants after you throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be God to you and to your descendants after you. I will give to you and to your descendants after you, the land of your sojournings, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.  
 since Abraham will surely become a great and mighty nation, and in him all the nations of the earth will be blessed? 
 I will multiply your descendants as the stars of heaven, and will give your descendants all these lands; and by your descendants all the nations of the earth shall be blessed; 
 God also said to him, “I am God Almighty; Be fruitful and multiply; A nation and a company of nations shall come from you, And kings shall come forth from you. 
 Joseph died, and all his brothers and all that generation. But the sons of Israel were fruitful and increased greatly, and multiplied, and became exceedingly mighty, so that the land was filled with them. 
 The Lord your God has multiplied you, and behold, you are this day like the stars of heaven in number. May the Lord, the God of your fathers, increase you a thousand-fold more than you are and bless you, just as He has promised you! 
 He will love you and bless you and multiply you; He will also bless the fruit of your womb and the fruit of your ground, your grain and your new wine and your oil, the increase of your herd and the young of your flock, in the land which He swore to your forefathers to give you. 
 Your servant is in the midst of Your people which You have chosen, a great people who are too many to be numbered or counted. 
 “You made their sons numerous as the stars of heaven, And You brought them into the land Which You had told their fathers to enter and possess. 
 “Look to Abraham your father And to Sarah who gave birth to you in pain; When he was but one I called him, Then I blessed him and multiplied him.  
 I will give to you and to your descendants after you, the land of your sojournings, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.  
 The Lord appeared to Abram and said, “To your descendants I will give this land.  So he built an altar there to the Lord who had appeared to him. 
 Sojourn in this land and I will be with you and bless you, for to you and to your descendants I will give all these lands, and I will establish the oath which I swore to your father Abraham. 
 See, I have placed the land before you; go in and possess the land which the Lord swore to give to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to them and their descendants after them.’ 
 So you shall keep His statutes and His commandments which I am giving you today, that it may go well with you and with your children after you, and that you may live long on the land which the Lord your God is giving you for all time.  
 “You shall therefore keep every commandment which I am commanding you today, so that you may be strong and go in and possess the land into which you are about to cross to possess it; so that you may prolong your days on the land which the Lord swore to your fathers to give to them and to their descendants, a land flowing with milk and honey. For the land, into which you are entering to possess it, is not like the land of Egypt from which you came, where you used to sow your seed and water it with your foot like a vegetable garden.read more. But the land into which you are about to cross to possess it, a land of hills and valleys, drinks water from the rain of heaven, a land for which the Lord your God cares; the eyes of the Lord your God are always on it, from the beginning even to the end of the year. 
 Now the promises were spoken to Abraham and to his seed. He does not say, “And to seeds,  as referring to many, but rather to one, “And to your seed,  that is, Christ. 
 It is you who are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant which God made with your fathers, saying to Abraham, ‘And in your seed all the families of the earth shall be blessed.’ For you first, God raised up His Servant and sent Him to bless you by turning every one of you from your wicked ways.  
 And if you belong to Christ, then you are Abraham’s descendants, heirs according to promise. 

 id="file23242558" filename="blessing-today-a-biblical-theology-of-blessing-4" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://malaysiagospel.org/article/blessing-today-a-biblical-theology-of-blessing-4/">
 Blessing Today – A Biblical Theology Of Blessing (Part 4) 
 Paul Barker 
 3 Minute Read 
 In part 1 of this series, we began to explore prosperity theology – the idea that Christians should expect the same kind of material blessing enjoyed by God’s people in the Old Testament. In part 2, we saw that the Old Testament people of God could expect blessings in this world. In part 3, we considered how these blessings are fulfilled in Christ. 
 Our previous posts on prosperity theology considered the importance of blessing in the Old Testament and observed how it is fulfilled and expanded with the coming of Christ. Jesus not only makes God’s OT promise of blessing come true, he expands its horizons: into all the world; into heaven; and into the future. For those in Christ there is a greater blessing, a greater “land,  and greater blessings. 
 When we examine prosperity theology in the light of this biblical development – following the flow of Scripture rather than simply arguing exegetical points on particular verses – its basic flaws become clear. 
 Prosperity teaching fails to grasp (inadvertently or deliberately) the trajectory of Old Testament prosperity promises. It fails to follow the course of the great river that runs through the whole Bible and empties into Christ. Prosperity theology fails to see how things develop through the two testaments. It misunderstands the New Testament’s development of the promises to Abraham. At its best, prosperity theology is a simplistic transference of Old Testament themes to Christians today. At its worst, it offers an excuse for greed under the guise of a perverted theology. 
 A more serious error of prosperity theology is that it sidelines Jesus. It fails to grasp both the nature of his teaching about kingdom, and the way he transforms the old covenant. Prosperity theologians, like the judaisers of the first century or those who obsess over the land of Palestine today, treat Jesus as a means to an end. They make something else – blessing, land or race – the ultimate goal that he serves. They fail to see how he offers us something much greater in himself. 
 The Place of Prosperity 
 How then should we think about prosperity where it does occur amongst believers? 
 First, we should think of it in missional terms. Abraham’s descendants were to be blessed for the sake of the nations (Genesis 12:2-3). Israel would obey God and be blessed; and thus other nations would be drawn to Yahweh (Deuteronomy 4:5-8). Some of this pattern continues in Jesus’ command that we should “make friends for yourselves by means of [worldly] wealth so that when it is gone, they may welcome you into the eternal homes,  (Luke 16:9). 
 Second, we must remember that earthly prosperity is for sharing with the poor. The Sinai law, the teaching of Jesus, the example of the early church and of Paul’s collection all demonstrate a consistent stance here. Paul summarises it like this in his instructions to Timothy: 
 “…as for those who in the present age are rich, command them not to be haughty, or to set their hopes on the uncertainty of riches, but rather on God who richly provides us with everything for our enjoyment. They are to do good, to be rich in good works, generous, and ready to share, thus storing up for themselves the treasure of a good foundation for the future.  
 ~ 1 Timothy 6:17-19 
 Third, we need to understand that earthly wealth is temporary. The material wealth of the old covenant was a shadow of the new covenant’s greater blessings and heavenly treasure which cannot fade, perish or spoil. The wealthy Christian also needs to remember that he or she will “disappear like a flower in the field … in the midst of a busy life,  (James 1:11). 
 Finally we need to heed warnings about wealth. Even in the Old Testament, as noted above, material wealth is not embraced fully. God’s faithful people may suffer and be poor. Wealth itself is a danger. This becomes even clearer in the New Testament. The love of money is a root of evil; the desire to be rich is a trap (1Tim 6:9-10). 
 There is no biblical warrant to promise material wealth to believers today. The Bible is a corporate sufficiency gospel, not an individualistic prosperity gospel. 
 This article was originally published by The Gospel Coalition Australia and has been republished with permission of the author. 
 Get articles delivered straight to your inbox. Sign up for our mailing list here. 
 Follow us on: 
 Paul Barker is an Assistant Bishop in the Anglican Diocese of Melbourne. Until 2016 he was Regional Coordinator for Asia for Langham Preaching, a Visiting Lecturer at Myanmar Evangelical Graduate School of Theology and taught in a variety of other Asian seminaries. He is the author of The Triumph of Grace in Deuteronomy, a book of expositions on Amos and other articles and short books. Formerly he was Senior Minister of Holy Trinity Anglican Church Doncaster, Melbourne. 
 Related Articles 
 Bethel Church in Redding, California, is becoming increasingly influential amongst churches in my own city of Sydney. This is partly due to its promotion by Hillsong and also because of its influential music label. So I’ve set myself the task of reading through some of Bethel’s books in order to understand their theology... 
 Does Jesus really expect believers to raise the dead as part of “normal Christian life? Stephen Tan considers two unhelpful responses. In John’s Gospel, Jesus performs a series of signs to show that he is Israel’s long-awaited Messiah. In John 11, he performs the climactic sign, raising to life his friend Lazarus, who had been dead and buried four days. 
 Few evangelicals today will question the importance of expository preaching. What is less clear, however, is our commitment to preach the whole Bible—every verse, every chapter and every book. In The Whole Counsel of God, Tim Patrick and Andrew Reid convincingly argue that it is not enough for us to merely preach from the Bible... 

 id="file23242625" filename="bless-others" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.peterdehaan.com/christianity/bless-others/">
 God Blesses Us So That We Can Bless Others﻿ 
 God Told Abraham That He Would Bless Him and Through Him Bless All Nations 
 How often do we ask God to bless us? It’s a request I make most every day. Sometimes more than once. I suspect you may often ask for God’s blessings too. 
 What do we mean when we ask for God’s blessings? Are we asking for the intangible, more joy, peace, and clarity? Or do we desire tangible things, like money, possessions, and power? We might ask for his blessings in a vague way, not really knowing what we’re requesting. 
 When God blesses us, is it simply to make our lives better? More enjoyable? Easier? Could be. He does love us, and he may bless us simply because he loves us and wants to do good things for us. 
 Be a Blessing 
 To father Abraham God promised that he would make Abraham into a great nation and bless him. In turn he would be a blessing to others. Everyone on earth would be blessed through Abraham (Genesis 12:1-3). 
 So, God blessed Abraham so that he could bless others. I think this goes beyond placing our hand on someone’s head and saying, “I bless you in God’s name.  
 Later God reiterates his promise of blessing. He tells Abraham that he will bless him and his descendants. And through his descendants, God will bless all the nations. He will bless everyone through Abraham and his family through the ages (Genesis 22:17-18). 
 Like Abraham, we can bless others. Whether we have received many blessings from God or a few—though we certainly receive more than we realize—these blessings aren’t just for ourselves. God blesses us so that we can also bless others. 
 Is that what we’re doing with God’s blessings? Or are we hoarding them for ourselves? 
 If we give freely, we’ll receive more. If we cling to what we have, we’ll receive less (Matthew 25:29). Remember that God loves a cheerful giver (2 Corinthians 9:7). 
 God blesses us because he loves us, and God blesses us so we can bless others. Are we doing all we can to be a blessing to others? 
 Peter DeHaan writes about biblical Christianity to confront status quo religion and live a life that matters. He seeks a fresh approach to following Jesus through the lens of Scripture, without the baggage of made-up traditions and meaningless practices. Read more in his books, blog, and weekly email updates. 

 id="file23242648" filename="bo3613334.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/B/bo3613334.html">
 Blessed Rage for Order 
 The New Pluralism in Theology 
 In Blessed Rage for Order, David Tracy examines the cultural context in which theological pluralism emerged. Analyzing orthodox, liberal, neo-orthodox, and radical models of theology, Tracy formulates a new ’revisionist’ model. He considers which methods promise the most certain results for a revisionist theology and applies his model to the principal questions in contemporary theology, including the meanings of religion, theism, and of christology. 
 Table of Contents 
 Preface Part I 1. The Pluralist Context of Contemporary Theology Introduction: Pluralism and Revision The Crisis of the Christian Theologian in the Modern World: the Disenchantment with Mystifications The Crisis of the Modern Secular Mind: The Disenchantment with Disenchantment 2. Five Basic Models in Contemporary Theology Introduction: The Needs for Models Orthodox Theology: Believers and Beliefs Liberal Theology: Modern Secularity and Christian Belief Neo-Orthodox Theology: Radical Contemporary Christian Faith and the God of Jesus Christ Radical Theology: Secular Affirmation and Theistic Negations The Revisionist Model: A Critical Correlation 3. A Revisionist Model for Contemporary Theology First Thesis: The two principal sources for theology are Christian texts and common human experience and language. Second Thesis: The theological task will involve a critical correlation of the results of the investigations of the two sources of theology. Third Thesis: The principal method of investigation of the source "common human experience and language" can be described as a phenomenology of the "religious dimension" present in everyday and scientific experience and language. x: Blessed Rage for Order Fourth Thesis: The principal method of investigation of the source "the Christian tradition" can be described as an historical and hermeneutical investigation of classical Christian texts. Fifth thesis: To determine the truth-status of the results of one’s investigation into the meaning of both common human experience and Christian texts, the theologian should employ an explicitly transcendental or metaphysical mode of reflection. 4. The Search for Adequate Criteria and Modes of Analysis Common Human Experience and Language: Modes of Analysis Christian Texts: The Possibility of Their Interpretation The Need of Criteria of Appropriateness Interpretation Theory The Task of Critical Correlation Part II 5. The Religious Dimension of Common Human Experience and Language Foreground: Purpose and Structure of Part II The Concept of Limit Limit-Questions in Science Science and Religion: Their Relationship The Religious Dimension of Science: Self-Transcendence as Scientific Authenticity The Religious Dimension of Science: Self-Transcendence and Limit-Questions Limit-Questions in Morality Religion and Morality: Identical or Distinct? The Logic of Limit-Questions in Moral Discourse Limit-Questions in Morality Limit-Situations in the World of the Everyday 6. Religious Language in the New Testament Background: Analytic Philosophy and Religious Language New Testament Language: The Breaking of Forms Proverbs Proclamatory Sayings Parabolic Language New Testament Limit-Experience: A Possible Mode-of-Being-in-the-World 7. The Question of God: Metaphysics Revisited Introduction: Limit-Language and Limit-Concepts Religious Language and Cognitive Claims: The Possibility and Necessity of Metaphysics Ian Ramsey: The Prospect for a "Theological Metaphysics" Frederic Ferré: The Logic of Theistic Language and the Place of "Metaphysical Facts" Schubert Ogden: Faith, Religious and Theistic Representative Language, and Metaphysics Religious Language and the Impossibility of Metaphysical Language: Anders Nygren Deductive Metaphysics Inductive Metaphysics Metaphysics as Conceptual Poetry The Uses and Abuses of Religious Language Metaphysics and Metaphor Metaphysics and Myth 8. The Meaning, Meaningfulness, and Truth of God-Language The Philosophical Situation: The New Metaphysics The Theological Situation: The Search for an Appropriate Formulation of the Meaning and Truth of God The Meaningfulness of Christian God-Language: The Search for an Adequate Limit-Language 9. The Re-presentative Limit-Language of Christology Introduction: The Question of Christology The Fact of the Need for Fiction The Fact of Evil xii: Blessed Rage for Order Fact and Possibilities: Actualizations and Representations Christological Language as Re-presentative Limit-Language 10. History, Theory, and Praxis Introductory Summary Practical Theology: The Praxis of A Revisionist Theory Index of Persons Index of Subjects 
 Related Titles 
 Be the first to know 
 Get the latest updates on new releases, special offers, and media highlights when you subscribe to our email lists! 

 id="file23242820" filename="bonhoeffers-stand-against-nazi-theology" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.faithgateway.com/bonhoeffers-stand-against-nazi-theology/">
 Bonhoeffer’s Stand Against Nazi Theology 
 Editor’s Note: As Adolf Hitler and the Nazis seduced a nation, bullied a continent, and attempted to exterminate the Jews of Europe, a young pastor and theologian named Dietrich Bonhoeffer become one of the first to speak out against Hitler. As a double agent, he joined the plot to assassinate the Führer, and he was hanged in Flossenberg concentration camp at age thirty-nine. Since his death, Bonhoeffer has grown to be one of the most fascinating, complex figures of the twentieth century. In Bonhoeffer: Pastor, Martyr, Prophet, Spy, author Eric Metaxas brings the reader face-to-face with a man determined to do the will of God radically, courageously, and joyfully — even to the point of death. Enjoy today’s excerpt from the abridged biography. 
 * 
 It’s been our misfortune to have the wrong religion. Why didn’t we have the religion of the Japanese, who regard sacrifice for the Fatherland as the highest good? The Mohammedan religion too would have been much more compatible to us than Christianity. Why did it have to be Christianity with its meekness and flabbiness? — Adolf Hitler 
 On January 30, 1933, at noon, Adolf Hitler became the democratically elected chancellor of Germany. The Third Reich had begun. 
 Two days later, on Wednesday, February 1, a twenty-six-year-old theologian gave a radio address at the Potsdamerstrasse radio station. Bonhoeffer’s speech was titled “The Younger Generation’s Altered Concept of Leadership.  It dealt with the fundamental problems of leadership by a Führer, explaining how such a leader inevitably becomes an idol and a “mis-leader.  Before he could finish, the speech was cut off. 
 This story is usually told as though Bonhoeffer had bravely put himself forward to speak out against Hitler, whose henchmen ordered the microphones turned off and the broadcast ended. But the speech had been scheduled for some time and was not a response to Hitler’s election. Still, the timing of Bonhoeffer’s speech, two days after Hitler’s election, was uncanny. 
 The Nazis may have censored the broadcast, but it’s also possible that Bonhoeffer and the station manager had misunderstood each other, and he simply ran out of time. It’s unclear whether the Nazis could yet control the airwaves as they certainly would in a few years. 
 In any case, Bonhoeffer was upset that the speech ended prematurely, mainly because he didn’t want his listeners to come away with the notion that he approved of Hitler. Anyone who heard the end of the speech would understand that the Führer Principle was disastrously misguided, but since no one heard the ending, Bonhoeffer had the speech duplicated and sent it to many of his influential friends and relatives, along with a note explaining that the speech’s conclusion had been cut off. The speech was also published in the Kreuzzeitung, a politically conservative newspaper, and Bonhoeffer was invited to give an extended version of the speech in early March at the College of Political Science in Berlin. Such things were still possible in early 1933. 
 Bonhoeffer began by explaining why Germany was looking for a Führer. The First War and the subsequent depression and turmoil had brought about a crisis in which the younger generation, especially, had lost all confidence in the traditional authority of the kaiser and the church. The German notion of the Führer arose out of this generation and its search for meaning and guidance out of its troubles. The difference between real leadership and the false leadership of the Führer was this: real leadership derived its authority from God, the source of all goodness; the authority of the Führer was submitted to nothing. 
 Bonhoeffer stated, “Whereas earlier leadership was expressed in the form of the teacher, the statesman, the father . . . now the Führer has become an independent figure. The Führer is completely divorced from any office; he is essentially and only ‘the Führer’ … 
 The fearful danger of the present time is that above the cry for authority, be it of a Leader or of an office, we forget that man stands alone before the ultimate authority and that anyone who lays violent hands on man here is infringing eternal laws and taking upon himself superhuman authority which will eventually crush him. The eternal law that the individual stands alone before God takes fearful vengeance where it is attacked and distorted. Thus the Leader points to the office, but Leader and office together point to the final authority itself, before which Reich or state are penultimate authorities. Leaders or offices which set themselves up as gods mock God and the individual who stands alone before him, and must perish.1 
 Forty-eight hours had passed since Hitler’s election, but with Bonhoeffer’s speech the battle lines were drawn. 
 Hitler gave a speech that day too. He was just forty-three and had already toiled in the political wilderness half his life. Ten years had passed since the Bierhall Putsch that landed him in prison. Now he was the chancellor of Germany. The opening words of his speech that day were: “We are determined, as leaders of the nation, to fulfill as a national government the task which has been given to us, swearing fidelity only to God, our conscience, and our Volk.  Hitler then declared that his government would make Christianity “the basis of our collective morality.  This statement, which was a lie, instantly annulled itself. He ended with another appeal to the God he did not believe in, but whose Jewish and Christian followers he would thenceforward persecute and kill: “May God Almighty take our work into his grace, give true form to our will, bless our insight, and endow us with the trust of our Volk!  
 Years afterward, Bonhoeffer’s father recorded his thoughts on Hitler’s victory: 
 From the start, we regarded the victory of National Socialism in 1933 and Hitler’s appointment as Reichkanzler as a misfortune — the entire family agreed on this. In my own case, I disliked and mistrusted Hitler because of his demagogic propagandistic speeches… his habit of driving about the country carrying a riding crop, his choice of colleagues — with whose qualities, incidentally, we in Berlin were better acquainted than people elsewhere — and finally because of what I heard from professional colleagues about his psychopathic symptoms.2 
 Four weeks later, Bonhoeffer preached at the Trinity Church in Berlin. It was the first time he had preached since Hitler had come to power. Bonhoeffer saw the new situation for what it was and was not afraid to preach what he saw: 
 The church has only one altar, the altar of the Almighty… before which all creatures must kneel… Whoever seeks something other than this must keep away; he cannot join us in the house of God… The church has only one pulpit, and from that pulpit, faith in God will be preached, and no other faith, and no other will than the will of God, however well-intentioned.3 
 1. No Rusty Swords: Letters, Lectures and Notes 1928–1936, vol. 1, Collected Works of Dietrich Bonhoeffer, ed. Edwin H. Robertson, trans. Edwin H. Robertson and John Bowden (New York: Harper and Row, 1965), 203–04. 
 2. Eberhard Bethge, Dietrich Bonhoeffer: A Biography, rev. ed. (Minneapolis: Augsburg Fortress, 2000), 258. 
 3. Ibid., 257. 
 Excerpted with permission from Bonhoeffer Abridged: Pastor, Martyr, Prophet, Spy by Eric Metaxas, copyright Eric Metaxas. 
 Watch the video: 
 * * * 
 Your Turn 
 It is He who changes the times and the epochs; He removes kings and establishes kings; He gives wisdom to wise men and knowledge to men of understanding. — Daniel 2:21 
 How does Bonhoeffer’s example inspire you? How are his views on leadership helpful today? We’d love to hear your thoughts in the comments! 

 id="file23242726" filename="byzantine-catholic-liturgy" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://blessedisshe.net/blog/byzantine-catholic-liturgy/">
 DAILY DEVOTIONS 
 Byzantine Catholic Tradition + Liturgy 
 April 9, 2019 
 You might have heard that there are various rites within the Catholic Church, but you might not be sure what exactly that means. In order to more fully understand the origin and celebration of these rites, we asked an active member of our Blessed is She community, Jen, a Byzantine Catholic, to break it down for us. We hope that this Catholic rite Q&A gives you clarity and appreciation for the beautiful diversity of our Faith! 
 A Look at the Different Rites in the Catholic Church 
 What is a rite within the Catholic Church, and why are there different rites? 
 When the Apostles began to spread out to share the Gospel, the way that Christianity developed in each geographical place was influenced by many different factors, including the culture and history of the people becoming Christian. God works through our humanity to build the Church, and that resulted in a wealth of diversity! All of these peoples received the same Faith from the Apostles, but they each have their own spirituality, approach to theology, and liturgy, which led to the development of unique rites. 
 A rite is sort of like a family of churches within the family of the whole Catholic Church. In the early Church, there were five sees based in the most significant cities in the ancient world, each with apostolic origin: 
 Jerusalem was the starting point of them all, followed by 
 Antioch 
 Alexandria 
 Rome, and 
 Constantinople, which was a slightly later addition that grew out of Antioch. 
 The five sees saw further development into more than one distinct rite. Throughout history, the number has fluctuated. 
 The See of Rome also used to have multiple rites, in fact, some of which are still in limited use. 
 Today, there are a total of 24 self-governing sui juris churches that make up the Catholic Church as a whole. These churches fall into the six different rites: 
 Armenian 
 West Syriac (Maronite and Syro-Malankar) 
 The Byzantine, Armenian, and Syriac rites all grew out of the See of Antioch. 
 The most common Byzantine Catholic churches in the United States are Byzantine Ruthenian, Melkite (Byzantines originating from the Middle East), Ukrainian, and Romanian. There are a few Russian Catholic and Italo-Albanian parishes or missions. 
 So are all Eastern Catholic rites in line with the Magisterium and in communion with Rome? 
 All Eastern Catholic churches are in communion with the Apostolic See of Rome, and as such also the Pope as he is the Bishop of Rome. The Bishop of Rome is understood as having a certain primacy as first among equals, like the eldest among brothers. Each bishop, however is the primary guardian of the faithful in his church. 
 I’m Roman Catholic. Can I attend the liturgy of an Eastern Catholic rite on Sundays to fulfill my obligation? What should I know before I visit? 
 Absolutely! You can always attend any Catholic church of any rite. And you are always welcome to receive the Eucharist in any Catholic Church as long as you are properly disposed. 
 You can also go to Confession to the priest there if you like. In the Byzantine rite, the priest usually hears confessions standing in front of an Icon of Christ. He will also use a different prayer of absolution. It’s a very beautiful experience! 
 Receiving the Eucharist in an Eastern Rite 
 One thing to be aware of when visiting a for Divine Liturgy is that we use leavened bread for the Eucharist. This symbolizes that the Lord is alive and has risen. The yeast is likened to the soul. It is alive, and because Christ is risen, the East has always seen leavened bread as fitting for the Eucharist. 
 In the majority of Eastern churches the Eucharist is dipped into the chalice, and then given to the faithful from a spoon. Others, like the Melkite Church, will use intinction, where the priest will dip the Eucharist in the chalice and then place it in the mouth of the communicant. The priest might ask your name as you come up, as he says a short prayer that usually includes your name. Otherwise he will say “the handmaiden of God.  
 You can just go and see what the practice is and follow suit. But if you would feel more comfortable, you can let the priest or someone know ahead of time that you want to receive Communion and aren’t sure what to expect. They’ll be happy to show you! 
 How can I tell the difference between an Eastern Catholic church and an Eastern Orthodox church? 
 Ideally, just the name on the door! It is important to remember that the various particular churches developed their diversity long before they split, and they all came back into communion at different points in history, in different circumstances. Their theology, spirituality, and traditions were not meant to change. 
 However, all of the Eastern churches have experienced some Latinization—the adoption of traditions of the West. Often, unfortunately, at the expense of their own traditions. An Eastern Catholic church (in line with the Pope and the Magisterium) is likely to have more Latinizations than an Eastern Orthodox church (not Catholic/submissive to the Pope). 
 Beauty in Diversity 
 The Church has emphasized the importance of all the churches diversity being restored and protected so that it can as Pope St. John Paul II said, “breathe with both lungs again.  
 In Orientalem Ecclesiarum the Second Vatican Council declared that: 
 History, tradition, and numerous ecclesiastical institutions manifest luminously how much the universal Church is indebted to the Eastern Churches. All Eastern rite members should know and be convinced that they can and should always preserve their lawful liturgical rites and their established way of life, and that these should not be altered except by way of an appropriate and organic development. Easterners themselves should honor all these things with the greatest fidelity. Besides, they should acquire an ever greater knowledge and a more exact use of them. If they have improperly fallen away from them because of circumstances of time or personage, let them take pains to return to their ancestral ways. 
 This is a slow process though, and you may see instances of it to varying degrees it still. But we recognize that it is important to move closer to our identity. Not because anything is wrong with the Latin customs that have been adopted in and of themselves, but because the Church does not want us to lose our diversity. 
 In a well-known speech at the second Vatican Council, the Patriarch of the Melkite Catholic Church at the time, Patriarch Maximos IV, spoke of the mission of Eastern Catholics: 
 to ensure that Catholicism remains open to every culture, every spirit, and every form of organization compatible with the unity of faith and love. At the same time, by our example, we must enable the Orthodox Church to recognize that a union with the great Church of the West, with the See of Peter, can be achieved without being compelled to give up Orthodoxy or any of the spiritual treasures of the apostolic and patristic East, which is opened toward the future no less to the past. 
 WEEKLY BLOG UPDATES (+ more!) 
 We'll send you the blog updates weekly in your inbox (with some special tips + tricks to living liturgically from our Blog Editor, Olivia Spears). 
 NAME* 
 First 
 Email* 
 Δ 
 The Byzantine Catholic Rite 
 What is the history behind the Byzantine Catholic rite, and what are the hallmarks of the Byzantine tradition? How is the Divine Liturgy different from the Mass? 
 The Byzantine Rite is a family of churches that grew out of the See of Constantinople, which grew out of the ancient see of Antioch. 
 Collectively, we are sometimes called “Greek Catholics  as opposed to “Roman Catholics.  But we’re not necessarily ethnically Greek, just like Roman Catholics aren’t necessarily Italian. 
 The Divine Liturgy 
 We all primarily celebrate the Divine Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom as our form of worship. Prayer is very communal in the Byzantine churches, even outside of Divine Liturgy. Prayer in the home is influenced a great deal by the festal cycle and often adapted from Morning and Evening Prayer of the Divine Office. 
 The basic structure of the Divine Liturgy is very similar to the Mass. The first half consists of the proclamation of Scripture, followed by the celebration of the Eucharist. There will be lots of incense! 
 The Divine Liturgy is entirely sung, and we go through a cycle of eight tones, to help everyone in the congregation to participate in singing. There are variations from one church: the eight tones in a Melkite church sounds different than a Ukrainian Catholic Church. Translations vary, and sometimes we commemorate different Saints. But for the most part, the calendars and lectionary are the same and the Divine Liturgy is fundamentally the same in any church of the Byzantine rite. 
 The altar is hidden by an iconostasis, or a wall of some sort, covered with icons of especially important Saints, and an icon of Christ and the Theotokos. The doors, traditionally adorned with the icon of the Annunciation, open throughout the Liturgy, signifying that Heaven is being opened for us. 
 Postures have different meanings from one rite to another. In the Byzantine rite, we typically worship standing. There are specific times that call for kneeling and prostration, which has a more penitential character. But not on Sunday, which is a day of rejoicing in the Resurrection. Rather than genuflection, we make what is called a metany, or a deep bow, signifying conversion, when approaching the altar or icons. 
 What are the differences in the celebration of the Sacraments in Byzantine and Roman traditions? 
 The Sacraments (often called Mysteries in the East) of initiation—Baptism, Chrismation (or Confirmation), and Eucharist—are received all together in the East. The idea that the Eucharist or Chrismation should be postponed until the Sacraments were understood never developed in the East. We recognize that we can never fully understand them. The sacraments, in fact, are what form our understanding of the grace of God. Holy Communion and the grace of Chrismation nurture the divine life placed in us at Baptism and understanding follows from that. 
 There are also married priests in the Byzantine Rite. Priestly celibacy is a discipline, not a doctrine. St. Peter himself was married! The Church, both East and West, has ordained married men to the diaconate and the priesthood at different points from the earliest days, although a man may not later marry after being ordained. 
 For many centuries, however, bishops have always been chosen from among celibate clergy, normally monastics. The families of priests add a wonderful element to community life of a parish, lending stability both to the community and in the priest’s life. He brings his experience of natural fatherhood and being a husband to being a spiritual father and understanding to the experiences of the laity. There is an important place for both in the Church! 
 Do Roman and Byzantine Catholics venerate the same Saints? What about the liturgical calendar? 
 We recognize and venerate the same Saints, but our liturgical calendars often focus on Saints of special significance to our own tradition. 
 We have our own titles and devotions to the Mother of God, for example. 
 Sometimes we commemorate the same Saints but on different days, and sometimes feasts differ in their significance. For example, the feast of Theophany, or Epiphany, is of even more importance to our festal cycle than Christmas (although we love Christmas, too!) In the East, Theophany emphasizes the Baptism of the Lord more, whereas in the West the adoration of the Magi is more prominent. Although the feast does commemorate both events, the emphasis is just different. 
 How can I find an Eastern Catholic church near me? Where can I learn more about the Byzantine rite and other Catholic rites? 
 I would start by just searching on Google for “Eastern Catholic Church near me  and see what pops up! You can also search for a specific tradition by looking up Melkite Catholic, Byzantine Catholic, Ukrainian Catholic, Chaldean, Maronite, etc. The types of Eastern Catholic churches near you will vary quite a bit depending on the part of the country you’re in. 
 And although you can’t receive communion there, don’t be afraid to visit an Orthodox non-Catholic church if you’d like to learn more about it if you don’t have an Eastern Catholic Church nearby. 
 The best way to learn about any church, regardless of rite, is to participate in the liturgy. Then, build a relationship with the community. 
 What we pray teaches us what we believe. 
 Are you an Eastern Catholic? What’s your experience like? Are you a Roman Catholic with some follow-up questions about Eastern rites? Feel free to ask in the comments? 
 JOIN THE COMMUNITY 
 Reader Interactions 
 15 Comments 
 This was a really informative and beautiful piece. As a Catholic Convert (Roman Catholic) I had been wondering myself what the differences were, and this blog post so clearly explained it in ways I could actually understand. A wonderful and beautiful tradition! 
 Thank you for this article!! It’s so complete and comprehensive, and I love how you explain with such love and passion some things that may at first seem strange to us Roman Catholics. It would be great to attend Mass at least once in each rite to get to know this treasure of the Church! 
 Thanks so much for this informative article. It is something that I have often wondered about. I have been curious and wanting to attend a service, this is so helpful. 
 Thank you for posting this. I, also would like to attend once at each rite. As a person who really hasn’t fully invested in my faith until late in life, I hunger for chances to serve and know more of my religion. 
 Thank you for such an informative article. I am a Byzantine Ruthenian Catholic from birth, and a Cantor in my Church. My dad is Eastern Rite Catholic and my mom is Latin Rite Catholic. I married a Latin Rite Catholic. As such, I have been fortunate to be immersed in the traditions of both rites. 
 Well said, Jen! Hooray for raising awareness about Eastern rites! I married into a Byzantine Ruthenian Catholic family and now I’m Byzantine rite myself. To anyone reading Jen’s post, I encourage you to go to an Eastern rite church for Holy Week/Easter this week. This is my favorite week of the year! There are parades and feasts and there is jumping and shouting and feasting! 
 Our three children are receiving Chrismation and Holy Communion on Saturday. We discovered the Melkite rite in September and fell in love! 
 Thank you! very well explained. The only area not mentioned is, appropriate dress atire, what is a must for male and female? 
 This is a really well-researched and accurate summary of the Eastern Catholic Churches. I’m Ukrainian Catholic, and having grown up going to Catholic schools, which are predominantly Roman Catholic, it’s always wonderful to see mentions of the Christian East on Catholic websites. 
 I know this is very late, but Maria, it really depends where you attend. There is a variety of dress at my parish, for example, with some people dressing more casual (jeans, etc), and others more formally (dresses, dress pants, dress shirts). Generally speaking, I would suggest clean, modest dress, which includes pants and at least short-sleeved shirts for men, and pants or dresses/skirts that aren’t super short, with not too low of necklines. Some parishes will also request the shoulders of women be covered, but that isn’t necessarily a requirement in other places. 
 I just attended Sunday liturgy at our local Byzantine monastery. We received both species, the Body and the Blood, Communion bread saturated with Wine; and then, prior to departure received the Body again..this time in the hand. 
 Hi! I’m a Roman Catholic, so I could be mistaken, but in all the Divine Liturgies I’ve attended, you just receive both species mingled, and only once. Perhaps the Communion-in-hand option was given there in light of COVID? That would be my best guess. 
 Hi! Before you left you received blessed bread in the hand, not consecrated bread. That is just a tradition that has to do with eating something before the fast the next day… 
 INFO 
 SOCIAL 
 This website uses cookies for analytical purposes. By choosing to continue, I’ll understand you agree with privacy policy + cookies policy 

 id="file23242699" filename="catholic-rituals-for-the-blessing-and-purifying-of-the-home-12084054.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://classroom.synonym.com/catholic-rituals-for-the-blessing-and-purifying-of-the-home-12084054.html">
 Catholic Rituals for the Blessing and Purifying of the Home 
 ROBERT PAXTON 
 29 SEP 2017 
 The ancient treasury of Roman Catholic ritual provides many options for blessing and purifying a home in almost any situation. Typically these blessing ceremonies are led by ordained clerics such as the bishop of the diocese or a priest or deacon from the local parish. In some cases, lay people participate in the ritual involved or even lead the blessing independently. 
 Explore this article 
 1 Blessing Of A New Home 
 Catholics often wish to have new homes blessed by a priest. This applies to previously owned homes as well. As with sacraments and other catholic rituals, there are introductory rites which begin with all present making the sign of the cross. Then the priest or deacon will read from scripture before all take part in intoning the intercessions which ask the Holy Spirit to inhabit the home. Finally, the priest or deacon blesses the home with hands outstretched. If necessary, a lay minister may carry out many of these duties, with some changes to gesture and wording. 
 2 Epiphany Blessing 
 During the feast of the Epiphany on January 6th, Catholics may ask their priest to bless chalk that they have set aside for a special blessing of their home. When the family returns from mass, all make the sign of the cross and the head of the household leads a prayer of peace for the house and someone reads from from the Gospel of John. Then a family member uses chalk to write the first two digits of the new year above the main entrance. Then come the words "Christus Mansionem Benedicat," which is Latin for Christ bless this house. Finally, the last two digits of the new year are written. 
 3 Blessing Of A Bedroom 
 There is a short and simple prayer to simply bless a bedroom. It may be conducted by a priest, deacon or a lay minister. Whoever leads the prayer of blessing simply asks for long life and many children for those who sleep there. 
 4 Rite of Exorcism 
 If a situation in a home calls for an exorcism, then Catholics must get assistance from a priest who has permission from the local bishop to perform an exorcism. This is an elaborate ritual not only due to the lengthy prayers but also due to the preparation necessary on the part of all involved. Confession and mass, which should include reception of the eucharist for all taking part in the ceremony, precede the exorcism itself. The priest recites the Litany of Saints before commanding the demons to depart. 
 references 
 About the Author 
 Robert Paxton has been writing professionally since 2002 when he published his first novel. He has also published short stories and poems and writes ad copy for various websites. He graduated from the University of Arizona in 1995 with a bachelor's degree in creative writing. Paxton is a trained Montessori instructor who has taught at both the elementary and the secondary levels. 
 Regardless of how old we are, we never stop learning. Classroom is the educational resource for people of all ages. Whether you’re studying times tables or applying to college, Classroom has the answers. 

 id="file23242766" filename="celebrating-mass-final-blessing.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://catholicblogger1.blogspot.com/2011/06/celebrating-mass-final-blessing.html">
 How To Access Links 
 ***All links are accessible by clicking on the blue highlighted area throughout the blog.*** 
 Thursday, June 23, 2011 
 Celebrating the Mass Lesson- Final Blessing & Concluding Rite 
 (This lesson is in accordance with the new Roman Missal that is to be implemented on November 27, 2011.) *Be sure to adjust this lesson to fit the needs of your students. (Please take in consideration that I am just a Mom and I'm providing these lessons and activities to the best of my abilities. I will try to make them as accurate as possible, but I know I will make a few mistakes and it was not intentional.) Standing at the altar or at the chair and facing the people, with hands joined, the priest says: Let us pray. We all stand and pray in silence with the priest for a while, unless silence has just been observed. Then the priest, with hands extended, says the Prayer after Communion, at the end of which the people acclaim: Amen. If there are announcements to be made they are made at this time. If there is any other parish business to be taken care of, it usually will happen at this time as well. Then the dismissal takes place. The priest, facing the people and extending his hands, says: The Lord be with you. People: And with your spirit. The priest blesses the people, saying: May almighty God bless you: the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit. (The people make the Sign of the Cross when the priest says this.) People: Amen. ____________________________________________________________ *On certain days or occasions, this formula of blessing is preceded, in accordance with the rubrics, by another more solemn formula of blessing or by a prayer over the people. ____________________________________________________________ In a Pontifical Mass, the celebrant receives the miter and, extending his hands, says: The Lord be with you. All reply: And with your spirit. The celebrant says: Blessed be the name of the Lord. All reply: Now and for ever. The celebrant says: Our help is in the name of the Lord. All reply: Who made heaven and earth. Then the celebrant receives the pastoral staff, if he uses it, and says: May almighty God bless you, making the Sign of the Cross over the people three times, he adds: the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit. All: Amen. ____________________________________________________________ Then the Deacon, or the Priest himself, with hands joined and facing the people, says: Go forth, the Mass is ended. Or: Go and announce the Gospel of the Lord. Or: Go in peace, glorifying the Lord by your life. Or: Go in peace. The people reply: Thanks be to God. Then the Priest venerates the altar as usual with a kiss, as at the beginning. After this he is joined by the other ministers in front of the altar, and after a brief moment they all bow toward the altar. While this is happening the congregation sings the final hymn. The ministers of the liturgy, minus the Book of the Gospels, now exit the church. The congregation should remain in their places until the end of the closing hymn. When you leave your pew, be sure to genuflect and do the Sign of the Cross. Just before you leave the church bless yourself with Holy Water at the water font or stoup, making the Sign of the Cross. Questions: Do we sit or stand during the Final Blessing and Concluding Rite? (Stand) What do we say after the priest says, “The Lord be with you.  (“And with your spirit. ) May we sit down when the priest sits down? (Yes) When the priest stands and says, “Let us pray  what do we do? (We stand.) When the priest blesses us what should we do? (Make the Sign of the Cross.) At the end of Mass, the priest reminds us to “Go in peace to love and serve the Lord.  (Or, “The Mass is ended. Go in Peace. ) What do we say then? (“Thanks be to God. ) When can we leave our seats? (The congregation should remain in their places until the end of the closing hymn and then they can leave.) What do you do when you leave your pew? (Genuflect and make the Sign of the Cross.) What do you do before you leave the church? (Bless yourself at the water font or stoup.) Activities: catholic-resources.org- Basic Texts for the Catholic Mass (free booklet you can print) The Catholic Toolbox- FREE Mass Booklet for Children Mass Booklet for you to edit and print out. This booklet is totally editable to enable you to add or delete what you want in your booklet. Make a cover or better yet, have your children make one to make it more personalized. Crafts: The Catholic Toolbox- Church Building Crafts The Catholic Toolbox- People at Mass Crafts catholicicing.com- Craft a Mass Kit Liturgical Objects Used in Mass- Activities, coloring, crafts, games, puzzles, quizzes, worksheets, etc. Games: catholicatechist.org- The Parts of the Mass (Game 1 & Game 2) *Be sure to change the cards to be in accordance to the new Roman Missal that is to be implemented on November 27, 2011. Parts of the Mass (Game I & II), The Parts of the Mass (Silent Activity)- Game I: Using cards that are provided, the teacher reads a clue from one of the cards and the students who are in teams will try to identify which part of the Mass that the teacher is describing. Game II: Follow the same directions, but use a missalette. Silent Activity: Shuffle one set of the cards made for Game I and have the students sort the cards into proper order. loyolapress.com- Order of the Mass Game Students identify what happens during Liturgy of the Word and Liturgy of the Eucharist. These games are free, however they are only to be used for classroom and personal use. They may not be published on any websites or other electronic media, or distributed in newsletters, bulletins, or any other form or sold for profit. Reproduction or retransmission of any materials, in whole or in part, in any manner, is not permitted. The Holy Mass Game- Directions and questions. Actions Speak Louder Than Words Game- A fun review game about actions during Mass. 
 Mass Review File Folder Game- For 2 Players or 2 Teams * The idea is to answer questions about Mass so you can trap one or more opponents’ pieces between two of your pieces. Those opponents’ pieces then change color to become your pieces. * The game ends when both you and your opponent cannot play another piece, or if every square on the board is filled, the game is over. You count up the number of black pieces and the number of white pieces and the winner is the one with the most pieces. Puzzles: mycatholicsource.com- Word Search with answers pflaum.com- Crossword Worksheets: The worksheets below are free, however they can only to be used for classroom and personal use. They may not be published on any websites or other electronic media, or distributed in newsletters, bulletins, or any other form or sold for profit. Reproduction or retransmission of any materials, in whole or in part, in any manner, is not permitted. Behavior In Mass- Draw a smile face next to the good things to do during Holy Mass. Draw a sad face next to the things not to do during Holy Mass. The Church is God’s House (for younger students)- Ask your child the following questions about the lesson today and have them circle the answer. Mass Etiquette Worksheet- Write True or False in the spaces provided. 
 7 comments: 
 Hi I'm doing a Giveaway on my blog and would love to give you a chance to win some adorable 4th of July Hair Clips! They're great for baby girls & toddlers! 
 Come on over and check it out: http://www.forloveofcupcakes.com 
 Thank you so much for posing this helpful information. It helped me a lot in preparing for my kids. 
 Thanks for the link to the Actions Speak Louder Than Words game. It will be helpful in my class tonight. Loving all your Parts of the Mass ideas! 
 Melisa Michalek- Thank you for your kind words. I am so glad you like the Parts of the Mass ideas! :) 
 could you please assist. The bishop with out celebrating mass arrives at communion and give the blessing of the mass . could you please tell is it liturgically right 
 I am just a mom and I am providing these lessons and activities to the best of my abilities. As for answering your question try Google. Maybe you will find what you need. :) 
 LINKING 
 *Please do not link directly to any activity I have made using its URL (the unique address for a file that is accessible on the Internet). Please link to the blog post of the activity. Thank you! :) 
 Search This Blog 
 Copyright 
 All activities, games, information, etc. on this blog are free; however they are only to be used for classroom and personal use. They may not be published on any websites or other electronic media, or distributed in newsletters, bulletins, or any other form or sold for profit. Reproduction or retransmission of any materials, in whole or in part, in any manner, is not permitted. 
 Please take a moment to leave a comment and link back. We would love to see your blog or website! Thank you! :) 
 All graphics/images/clipart etc. used on the activities or games are not my own and are from various internet sources. 
 Contact Form 
 Name 
 Email * 
 Message * 
 Disclaimer 
 All content provided on The Catholic Toolbox is for informational purposes only. The owner of this blog makes no representations as to the accuracy or completeness of any information on this site or found by following any link on this site. The owner will not be liable for any errors or omissions in this information nor for the availability of this information. The owner will not be liable for any losses, injuries, etc., or damages from the display or use of this information or from any links. These terms and conditions of use are subject to change at any time and without notice. 
 For your convenience, we provide links to various other websites that may be of interest to you. We are not responsible for the content of such external sites or resources, and do not endorse and are not responsible or liable for any content, advertising, products, or other materials on or available from such sites or resources. We are not responsible or liable, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with use of or reliance on any such content, goods or services available on or through any such site or resource. The Catholic Toolbox does not control such websites and is not responsible for their content nor is it responsible for the accuracy or reliability of any information, data, opinions, advice, or statements contained within such websites. These websites can change without warning making links inactive and/or the content altered. Please read the terms and conditions or terms of use policies of any other company or website you may link to from our website. 
 Gospel for the Mass Activities 
 Sunday Gospel for the Mass activities- Mass worksheets, coloring, puzzles, crafts, games, quizzes, lessons, etc. 

 id="file23242521" filename="Celtic_Blessings_and_Prayers.htm" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.faithandworship.com/Celtic_Blessings_and_Prayers.htm">
 Faith & Worship 
 Contemporary and Ancient Celtic Blessings 
 If you use this resource and would like to help with the cost of its continuing development, then donations are always welcome! 
 Prayers in the Celtic tradition, both old and new 
 These prayers come from a variety of sources, and are mainly traditional prayers, some translated from the Gaelic in which they were originally written. Often, the traditional prayers from remote locations contain a mix of Christian and pagan thoughts! 
 New Blessings in the 'Celtic' style 
 I lay my head to rest, and in doing so, lay at your feet the faces I have seen, the voices I have heard, the words I have spoken, the hands I have shaken, the service I have given, the joys I have shared, the sorrows revealed, I lay them at your feet, and in doing so lay my head to rest. 
 Through the dark hours of this night protect and surround us, Father, Son and Spirit, Three. Forgive the ill that we have done. Forgive the pride that we have shown. Forgive the words that have caused harm that we might sleep peaceably, and rise refreshed to do your will. Through the dark hours of this night protect and surround us, Father, Son and Spirit, Three 
 May the God of peace bring peace to this house. May the Son of peace bring peace to this house. May the Spirit of peace bring peace to this house, this night and all nights 
 Bless this house and those within. Bless our giving and receiving. Bless our words and conversation. Bless our hands and recreation. Bless our sowing and our growing. Bless our coming and our going. Bless all who enter and depart. Bless this house, your peace impart. 
 This night and every night grant to me light. This night and every night grant to me peace. This night and every night grant to me rest. This night and every night grant to me grace. This night and every night grant to me joy. 
 Celtic Blessings From Other Sources 
 (Sources given where known - copyright not known) 
 May the blessing of light be on you - light without and light within. May the blessed sunlight shine on you like a great peat fire, so that stranger and friend may come and warm himself at it. And may light shine out of the two eyes of you, like a candle set in the window of a house, bidding the wanderer come in out of the storm. And may the blessing of the rain be on you, may it beat upon your Spirit and wash it fair and clean, and leave there a shining pool where the blue of Heaven shines, and sometimes a star. And may the blessing of the earth be on you, soft under your feet as you pass along the roads, soft under you as you lie out on it, tired at the end of day; and may it rest easy over you when, at last, you lie out under it. May it rest so lightly over you that your soul may be out from under it quickly; up and off and on its way to God. And now may the Lord bless you, and bless you kindly. Amen. 
 Scottish Blessing 
 If there is righteousness in the heart, If there is righteousness in the heart, there will be beauty in the character. If there is beauty in the character, there will be harmony in the home. If there is harmony in the home, there will be order in the nation. If there is order in the nation, there will be peace in the world. So let it be. 
 (Scottish Blessing) 
 Lang may your lum reek. (Long may your chimney smoke.) 
 (Scottish Blessing) 
 Slainte mhor agus a h-uile beannachd duibh Good health and every good blessing to you! 
 (A Gaelic Prayer) 
 May you have - Walls for the wind And a roof for the rain, And drinks bedside the fire Laughter to cheer you And those you love near you, And all that your heart may desire 
 (Celtic Blessing) 
 May God be with you and bless you. May you see your children's children. May you be poor in misfortune, rich in blessings. May you know nothing but happiness From this day forward 
 (An Old Wedding Blessing) 
 May those who love us, love us. And those who don't love us, May God turn their hearts; And if He doesn't turn their hearts, May He turn their ankles, So we will know them by their limping. 
 Be ye our angel unawares If after Kirk ye bide a wee, There's some would like to speak to ye, If after Kirk ye rise and flee We' all seem cauld and still to ye. The one that's in the seat with ye Is stranger here than ye, maybe. All here have got their fears and cares, Add ye your soul unto our prayers, Be ye our angel unawares. 
 (Scottish Blessing) 
 May the hills lie low May the hills lie low, May the sloughs fill up, In thy way. 
 May all evil sleep, May all good awake, In thy way. 
 (Source: “Mystery on the Isle of Skye ) 
 God to enfold me, God to surround me, God in my speaking, God in my thinking. 
 God in my sleeping, God in my waking, God in my watching, God in my hoping. 
 God in my life, God in my lips, God in my soul, God in my heart. 
 God in my sufficing, God in my slumber, God in mine ever-living soul, God in mine eternity. 
 I arise today Through a mighty strength: God's power to guide me, God's might to uphold me, God's eyes to watch over me; God's ear to hear me, God's word to give me speech, God's hand to guard me, God's way to lie before me, God's shield to shelter me, God's host to secure me. 
 (first millenium - bridgid of gael) 
 You are the peace of all things calm You are the place to hide from harm You are the light that shines in dark You are the heart's eternal spark You are the door that's open wide You are the guest who waits inside You are the stranger at the door You are the calling of the poor You are my Lord and with me still You are my love, keep me from ill You are the light, the truth, the way You are my Saviour this very day. 
 (celtic oral tradition - 1st millennium) 
 May there always be work for your hands to do. May your purse always hold a coin or two. May the sun always shine upon your window pane. May a rainbow be certain to follow each rain. May the hand of a friend always be near to you and May God fill your heart with gladness to cheer you. 
 (traditional blessing) 
 May the road rise up to meet you. May the wind be always at your back. May the sun shine warm upon your face; the rains fall soft upon your fields and until we meet again, may God hold you in the palm of His hand. 
 (traditional gaelic blessing) 
 Beannachd Dia dhuit 
 (blessings of God be with you - ScotsGaelic) 
 We bathe your palms In the showers of wine, In the crook of the kindling, In the seven elements, In the sap of the tree, In the milk of honey, 
 We place nine pure, choice gifts In your clear beloved face: 
 The gift of form, The gift of voice, The gift of fortune, The gift of goodness, The gift of eminence, The gift of charity, The gift of integrity, The gift of true nobility, The gift of apt speech. 
 (traditional gaelic) 
 Circle me, Lord. Keep protection near And danger afar. Circle me, Lord Keep hope within. Keep doubt without. Circle me, Lord. Keep light near And darkness afar. Circle me, Lord. Keep peace within. Keep evil out. 
 (david adam) 
 Deep peace I breathe into you, O weariness, here: O ache, here! Deep peace, a soft white dove to You; Deep peace, a quiet rain to you; Deep peace, an ebbing wave to you! Deep peace, red wind of the east from you; Deep peace, grey wind of the west to You; Deep peace, dark wind of the north from you; Deep peace, blue wind of the south to you! Deep peace, pure red of the flame to you; Deep peace, pure white of the moon to you; Deep peace, pure green of the grass to you; Deep peace, pure brown of the earth to you; Deep peace, pure grey of the dew to you, Deep peace, pure blue of the sky to you! Deep peace of the running wave to you, Deep peace of the flowing air to you, Deep peace of the quiet earth to you, Deep peace of the sleeping stones to you! Deep peace of the Yellow Shepherd to you, Deep peace of the Wandering Shepherdess to you, Deep peace of the Flock of Stars to you, Deep peace from the Son of Peace to you, Deep peace from the heart of Mary to you, And from Briget of the Mantle Deep peace, deep peace! And with the kindness too of the Haughty Father Peace! In the name of the Three who are One, Peace! And by the will of the King of the Elements, Peace! Peace! 
 (From "The Dominion of Dreams. Under the Dark Star by Fiona Macleod (William Sharp,1895)) 
 Spare Us the Fall May the roof above never fall in, May we below never fall out. 
 (a Celtic grace) 
 My Fortress The Sacred Three My fortress be Encircling me Come and be round My hearth and my home. 
 (Celtic prayer) 
 A Familiar Stranger I saw a stranger today. I put food for him in the eating-place And drink in the drinking-place And music in the listening-place. 
 In the Holy name of the Trinity He blessed myself and my family. And the lark said in her warble Often, often, often Goes Christ in the stranger's guise. 
 O, oft and oft and oft, Goes Christ in the stranger's guise. 
 (Celtic Rune of Hospitality) 
 Be thou my vision, O Lord of my heart, Be all else but naught to me, Save that thou art; Be thou my best thought In the day and the night, Both waking and steeping, Thy presence my light. 
 May Christ and His Saints stand between you and harm. Mary and her Son. Patrick with his staff. Martin with his mantle. Brigid with her veil. Michael with his shield. And God over all with His strong right hand. 
 May your past be a pleasant memory, Your future filled with delight and mystery, Your now a glorious moment, That fills your life with deep contentment. 
 May your day be filled with blessings Like the sun that lights the sky, And may you always have the courage To spread your wings and fly! 
 May the blessings of light be upon you, Light without and light within, And in all your comings and goings, May you ever have a kindly greeting From them you meet along the road. 
 May the nourishment of the earth be yours, May the clarity of light be yours, May the fluency of the ocean be yours, May the protection of the ancestors be yours. 
 (John O'Donohue, from 'Benedictus: A Book of Blessings' ) 
 May dawn find you awake and alert, approaching your new day with dreams, possibilities, and promises. May evening find you gracious and fulfilled. May you go into the night blessed, sheltered, and protected. May your soul calm, console, and renew you. 
 God bless the corners of this house and all the lintel blessed, And bless the hearth and bless the board and bless each place of rest, And bless each door that opens wide to strangers as to kin, And bless each crystal window pane that lets the starlight in, And bless the rooftree overhead and every sturdy wall. The peace of man. The peace of God. With peace and love for all. 
 May your troubles be less And your blessings be more. And nothing but happiness Come through your door. 
 May green be the grass you walk on, May blue be the skies above you, May pure be the joys that surround you, May true be the hearts that love you. 
 May the face of every good news And the back of every bad news Be toward us. 
 May you be poor in misfortune, Rich in blessings, Slow to make enemies, And quick to make friends. But rich or poor, quick or slow, May you know nothing but happiness From this day forward. 
 You've blessed me with friends and laughter and fun With rain that's as soft as the light from the sun You've blessed me with the stars to brighten each night You've given me help to know wrong from right You've given me so much, so please Lord give me too A heart that is always Grateful to you. 
 May we live in peace without weeping. May our joy outline the lives we touch without ceasing. And may our love fill the world, angel wings tenderly beating. 
 (Trad Irish) 
 May the blessing of the rain be on you— the soft sweet rain. May it fall upon your spirit so that all the little flowers may spring up, and shed their sweetness on the air. May the blessing of the great rains be on you, may they beat upon your spirit and wash it fair and clean, and leave there many a shining pool where the blue of heaven shines, and sometimes a star. 
 May the good earth be soft under you when you rest upon it, and may it rest easy over you when, at the last, you lay out under it, And may it rest so lightly over you that your soul may be out from under it quickly, and up, and off, And be on its way to God. 
 Dear Lord, Give me a few friends who will love me for what I am, and keep ever burning before my vagrant steps the kindly light of hope... And though I come not within sight of the castle of my dreams, teach me to be thankful for life, and for time's olden memories that are good and sweet. And may the evening's twilight find me gentle still. 
 Bless those minding cattle, And those minding sheep, And those fishing the sea While the rest of us sleep. 
 If God sends you down a stony path, may he give you strong shoes. 
 May the rains sweep gentle across your fields, May the sun warm the land, May every good seed you have planted bear fruit, And late summer find you standing in fields of plenty. 
 Bless this house, o Lord, we pray. Make it safe by night and day. Bless these walls so firm and stout, Keeping want and trouble out. Bless the roof and chimney tall, Let thy peace lie over all. Bless the doors that they may prove Ever open to joy and love. Bless the windows shining bright, Letting in God's heavenly light. Bless the hearth a-blazing there, With smoke ascending like a prayer. Bless the people here within... Keep them pure and free from sin. Bless us all, that one day, we May be fit, O lord, to dwell with Thee. 

 id="file23242797" filename="chapter-15-religion" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://opentextbc.ca/introductiontosociology2ndedition/chapter/chapter-15-religion/">
 Chapter 15. Religion 
 Learning Objectives 
 Explain the difference between substantial, functional, and family resemblance definitions of religion. 
 Describe the four dimensions of religion: Belief, ritual, experience, and community. 
 Understand classifications of religion, like animism, polytheism, monotheism, and atheism. 
 Differentiate between the five world religions. 
 Explain the differences between various types of religious organizations: Churches, ecclesia, sects, and cults. 
 Examine the nature of sociological explanations of religion. 
 Compare and contrast theories on religion — Marx, Durkheim, Weber, Berger, Stark, Daly, and Woodhead. 
 Describe current global and Canadian trends of secularization and religious belief. 
 Describe the current religious diversity of Canada and its implications for social policy. 
 Explain the development and the sources of new religious movements. 
 Outline the social and political issues associated with fundamentalist movements. 
 Define the family resemblance between fundamentalisms in different religious traditions. 
 Describe the process of fundamentalist radicalization from a sociological perspective. 
 Explain the basis of contemporary issues of science and faith. 
 Introduction to Religion 
 It is commonly said that there are only two guarantees in life — death and taxes — but what can be more taxing than the prospect of one’s own death? Ceasing to exist is an overwhelmingly terrifying thought and it is one which has plagued individuals for centuries. This ancient stressor has been addressed over time by a number of different religious explanations and affirmations. Arguably, this capacity to provide answers for fundamental questions is what defines religion. For instance, under Hindu belief one’s soul lives on after biological death and is reborn in a new body. Under Christian belief one can expect to live in a heavenly paradise once one’s time runs out on earth. These are just two examples, but the extension of the self beyond its physical expiration date is a common thread in religious texts. 
 These promises of new life and mystifying promise lands are not simply handed out to everyone, however. They require an individual to faithfully practice and participate in accordance to the demands of specific commandments, doctrines, rituals, or tenants. Furthermore, despite one’s own faith in the words of an ancient text, or the messages of a religious figure, an individual will remain exposed to the trials, tribulations, and discomforts that exist in the world. During these instances a theodicy — a religious explanation for such sufferings — can help keep one’s faith by providing justification as to why bad things happen to good, faithful people. Theodicy is an attempt to explain or justify the existence of bad things or instances that occur in the world, such as death, disaster, sickness, and suffering. Theodicies are especially relied on to provide reason as to why a religion’s God (or God-like equivalent) allows terrible things to happen to good people. 
 Is there truly such a thing as heaven or hell? Can we expect to embody a new life after death? Are we really the creation of an omnipotent and transcendent Godly figure? These are all fascinating ontological questions — i.e., questions that are concerned with the nature of reality, our being and existence — and ones for which different religious traditions have different answers. For example, Buddhists and Taoists believe that there is a life force that can be reborn after death, but do not believe that there is a transcendent creator God, whereas Christian Baptists believe that one can be reborn once, or even many times, within a single lifetime. However, these questions are not the central focus of sociologists. Instead sociologists ask about the different social forms, experiences, and functions that religious organizations evoke and promote within society. What is religion as a social phenomenon? Why does it exist? In other words, the “truth  factor of religious beliefs is not the primary concern of sociologists. Instead, religion’s significance lies in its practical tendency to bring people together and, in notable cases, to violently divide them. For sociologists, it is key that religion guides people to act and behave in particular ways. How does it do so? 
 Regardless if one personally believes in the fundamental values, beliefs, and doctrines that certain religions present, one does not have to look very far to recognize the significance that religion has in a variety of different social aspects around the world. Religion can influence everything from how one spends their Sunday afternoon – -singing hymnals, listening to religious sermons, or refraining from participating in any type of work — to providing the justification for sacrificing one’s own life, as in the case in the Solar Temple mass suicide (Dawson & Thiessen, 2014). Religious activities and ideals are found in political platforms, business models, and constitutional laws, and have historically produced rationales for countless wars. Some people adhere to the messages of a religious text to a tee, while others pick and choose aspects of a religion that best fit their personal needs. In other words, religion is present in a number of socially significant domains and can be expressed in a variety of different levels of commitment and fervour. 
 In this chapter, classical social theorists Karl Marx, Émile Durkheim, and Max Weber provide the early insights that have come to be associated with the critical, functionalist, and interpretive perspectives on religion in society. Interestingly, each of them predicted that the processes of modern secularization would gradually erode the significance of religion in everyday life. More recent theorists like Peter Berger, Rodney Stark (feminist), and John Caputo take account of contemporary experiences of religion, including what appears to be a period of religious revivalism. Each of these theorists contribute uniquely important perspectives that describe the roles and functions that religion has served society over time. When taken altogether, sociologists recognize that religion is an entity that does not remain stagnant. It evolves and develops alongside new intellectual discoveries and expressions of societal, as well as individual, needs and desires. 
 A case in point would be the evolution of belief in the Catholic Church. At the beginning of the 20th century, the Roman Catholic Church responded to the challenges brought forth by secularization, scientific reasoning, and rationalist methodologies with Pope Pius X’s encyclical Pascendi dominici gregis (1907). This letter was circulated among all of the Catholic churches and identified the new “enemy of the cross  as the trend towards modernization. A secretive “Council of Vigilance  was established in each diocese to purge church teachings of the elements of modernism. The true faith “concerns itself with the divine reality which is entirely unknown to science.  
 However, in the 21st century, the Catholic Church appears to be adapting its attitudes towards modernization. The 266th Roman Catholic Pope, Pope Francis, has made public statements such as, “If a person is gay and seeks God and has good will, who am I to judge?  (Reuters, 2013) and “We cannot limit the role of women in the Church to altar girls or the president of a charity, there must be more  (BBC News, 2013). These statements seem to align the Church’s position with contemporary attitudes towards homosexuality and gender. Pope Francis has also addressed contemporary issues of climate change. At the 2015 U.N. climate conference in Paris, France, he stated that “[e]very year the problems are getting worse. We are at the limits. If I may use a strong word I would say that we are at the limits of suicide  (Pullella, 2015). 
 15.1. The Sociological Approach to Religion 
 From the Latin religio (respect for what is sacred) and religare (to bind, in the sense of an obligation), the term religion describes various systems of belief and practice concerning what people determine to be sacred or spiritual (Durkheim, 1915/1964; Fasching and deChant, 2001). Throughout history, and in societies across the world, leaders have used religious narratives, symbols, and traditions in an attempt to give more meaning to life and to understand the universe. Some form of religion is found in every known culture, and it is usually practiced in a public way by a group. The practice of religion can include feasts and festivals, God or gods, marriage and funeral services, music and art, meditation or initiation, sacrifice or service, and other aspects of culture. 
 Defining Religion 
 There are three different ways of defining religion in sociology — substantial definitions, functional definitions, and family resemblance definitions — each of which has consequences for what counts as a religion, and each of which has limitations and strengths in its explanatory power (Dawson and Thiessen, 2014). The problem of defining religion is not without real consequences, not least for questions of whether specific groups can obtain legal recognition as religions. In Canada there are clear benefits to being officially defined as a religion in terms of taxes, liberties, and protections from persecution. Guarantees of religious freedom under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms stem from whether practices or groups are regarded as legitimately religious or not. What definitions of religion do we use to decide these questions? 
 For example, the Céu do Montréal was established in 2000 as a chapter of the Brasilian Santo Daime church (Tupper, 2011). One of the sacraments specified in church doctrine and used in ceremonial rituals is ayahuasca, a psychedelic or entheogenic “tea  that induces visions when ingested. It has to be imported from the Amazon where its ingredients are found. But because it contains N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) and harmala alkaloids, it is a controlled substance under Canadian law. Importing and distributing it constitute trafficking and are subject to criminal charges. Nevertheless because of ayahuasca’s role as a sacrament in the church’s religious practice, Céu do Montréal was able to apply to the Office of Controlled Substances of Health Canada for a legal, Section 56 exemption to permit its lawful ceremonial use. Other neo-Vegetalismo groups who use ayahuasca in traditional Amazonian healing ceremonies in Canada, but do not have affiliations with a formal church-like organization, are not recognized as official religions and, therefore, their use of ayahuasca remains criminalized and underground. 
 The problem of any definition of religion is to provide a statement that is at once narrow enough in scope to distinguish religion from other types of social activity, while taking into account the wide variety of practices that are recognizably religious in any common sense notion of the term. Substantial definitions attempt to delineate the crucial characteristics that define what a religion is and is not. For example, Sir Edward Tylor argued that “a minimum definition of Religion [is] the belief in spiritual beings  (Tylor, 1871, cited in Stark, 1999), or as Sir James Frazer elaborated, “religion consists of two elements… a belief in powers higher than man and an attempt to propitiate or appease them  (Frazer, 1922, cited in Stark, ibid.). These definitions are strong in that they identify the key characteristic — belief in the supernatural — that distinguishes religion from other types of potentially similar social practice like politics or art. They are also easily and simply applied across societies, no matter how exotic or different the societies are. However, the problem with substantial definitions is that they tend to be too narrow. In the case of Tylor’s and Frazer’s definitions, emphasis on belief in the supernatural excludes some forms of religion like Theravadan Buddhism, Confucianism, or neo-paganism that do not recognize higher, spiritual beings, while also suggesting that religions are primarily about systems of beliefs, (i.e., a cognitive dimension of religion that ignores the emotive, ritual, or habitual dimensions that are often more significant for understanding actual religious practice). 
 On the other hand, functional definitions define religion by what it does or how it functions in society. For example, Milton Yinger’s definition is: “Religion is a system of beliefs and practices by means of which a group struggles with the ultimate problems of human life  (Yinger, 1970, cited in Dawson and Thiessen, 2014). A more elaborate functional definition is that of Mark Taylor (2007): religion is “an emergent, complex, adaptive network of symbols, myths, and rituals that, on the one hand, figure schemata of feeling, thinking, and acting in ways that lend life meaning and purpose and, on the other, disrupt, dislocate, and disfigure every stabilizing structure.  These definitions are strong in that they can capture the many forms that these religious problematics or dynamics can take — encompassing both Christianity and Theravadan Buddhism for example — but they also tend to be too inclusive, making it difficult to distinguish religion from non-religion. Is religion for example the only means by which social groups struggle with the ultimate problems of human life? 
 The third type of definition is the family resemblance model in which religion is defined on the basis of a series of commonly shared attributes (Dawson and Thiessen, 2014). The family resemblance definition is based on the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein’s ordinary language definition of games (Wittgenstein, 1958). Games, like religions, resemble one another — we recognize them as belonging to a common category — and yet it is very difficult to decide precisely and logically what the rule is that subsumes tiddly winks, solitaire, Dungeons and Dragons, and ice hockey under the category “games.  Therefore the family resemblance model defines a complex “thing  like religion by listing a cluster of related attributes that are distinctive and shared in common by different versions of that thing, while noting that not every version of the thing will have all of the attributes. The idea is that a family – even a real family – will hold a number of, say, physiological traits in common, which can be used to distinguish them from other families, even though each family member is unique and any particular family member might not have all them. You can still tell that the member belongs to the family and not to another because of the traits he or she shares. 
 It is also possible to define religion in terms of a cluster of attributes based on family resemblance. This cluster includes four attributes: particular types of belief, ritual, experience, and social form. This type of definition has the capacity to capture aspects of both the substantive and functional definitions. It can be based on common sense notions of what religion is and is not, without the drawback of being overly exclusive. While the thing, “religion,  itself becomes somewhat hazy in this definition, it does permit the sociologist to examine and compare religion based on these four dimensions while remaining confident that he or she is dealing with the same phenomenon. 
 The Four Dimensions of Religion 
 The incredible amount of variation between different religions makes it challenging to decide upon a concrete definition of religion that applies to all of them. In order to facilitate the sociological study of religion it is helpful to turn our attention to four dimensions that seem to be present, in varying forms and intensities, in all types of religion: belief, ritual, spiritual experience, and unique social forms of community (Dawson & Thiessen, 2014). 
 The first dimension is one that comes to mind for most Canadians when they think of religion, some systematic form of beliefs. Religious beliefs are a generalized system of ideas and values that shape how members of a religious group come to understand the world around them (see Table 15.1 and 15.2 below). They define the cognitive aspect of religion. These beliefs are taught to followers by religious authorities, such as priests, imams, or shamen, through formal creeds and doctrines as well as more informal lessons learned through stories, songs, and myths. A creed outlines the basic principles and beliefs of a religion, such The Nicene creed in Christianity (“I believe in the father, the son and the holy ghost… ), which is used in ceremonies as a formal statement of belief (Knowles, 2005). 
 Table 15.1. One way scholars have categorized religions is by classifying what or who they hold to be divine. 
 Belief systems provide people with certain ways of thinking and knowing that help them cope with ultimate questions that cannot be explained in any other way. One example is Weber’s (1915) concept of theodicy — an explanation of why, if a higher power does exist, good and innocent people experience misfortune and suffering. Weber argues that the problem of theodicy explains the prevalence of religion in our society. In the absence of other plausible explanations of the contradictory nature of existence, religious theodicies construct the world as meaningful. He gives several examples of theodicies — including karma, where the present actions and thoughts of a person have a direct influence on their future lives, and predestination, the idea that all events are an outcome God’s predetermined will. 
 The second dimension, ritual, functions to anchor religious beliefs. Rituals are the repeated physical gestures or activities, such as prayers and mantras, used to reinforce religious teachings, elicit spiritual feelings, and connect worshippers with a higher power. They reinforce the division between the sacred and the profane by defining the intricate set of processes and attitudes with which the sacred dimension of life can be approached. 
 A common type of ritual is a rite of passage, which marks a person’s transition from one stage of life to another. Examples of rites of passage common in contemporary Canadian culture include baptisms, Bar Mitzvahs, and weddings. They sacralize the process of identity transformation. When these rites are religious in nature, they often also mark the spiritual dangers of transformation. The Sun Dance rituals of many Native American tribes are rites of renewal which can also act as initiation-into-manhood rites for young men. They confer great prestige onto the pledgers who go through the ordeal, but there is also the possibility of failure. The sun dances last for several days, during which young men fast and dance around a pole to which they are connected by rawhide strips passed through the skin of the chest (Hoebel, 1978). During their weakened state, the pledgers are neither the person they were, nor yet the person they are becoming. Friends and family members gather in the camp to offer prayers of support and protection during this period of vulnerable “liminality.  Overall, rituals like these function to bring a group of people (although not necessarily just religious groups) together to create a common, elevated experience that increases social cohesion and solidarity. 
 From a psychological perspective, rituals play an important role in providing practitioners with access to spiritual “powers  of various sorts. In particular, they can access powers that both relieve or induce anxieties within a group depending on the circumstances. In relieving anxieties, religious rituals are often present at times when people face uncertainty or chance. In this sense they provide a basis of psychological stability. A famous example of this is Malinowski’s study of the Trobriand Islanders of New Guinea (1948). When fishing in the sheltered coves of the islands very little ritual was involved. It was not until fishermen decided to venture into the much more dangerous open ocean in search of bigger and riskier catches that a rigorous set of religious rituals were invoked, which worked to subdue the fears of not only the fisherman but the rest of the villagers. 
 In contrast, rituals can also be used to create anxieties that keep people in line with established norms. In the case of taboos, the designation of certain objects or acts as prohibited or sacred creates an aura of fear or anxiety around them. The observance of rituals is used to either prevent the transgression of taboos or to return society to normal after taboos have been transgressed. For example, early hunting societies observed a variety of rituals in their hunting practices in order to return the soul of the animal to its supernatural “owner.  Failure to observe these rituals was a transgression that threatened to unbalance the cosmological order and impact the success of future hunts. This failure could only be resolved through further specific rituals (Smith, 1982). In this example, sociologists would note that the taboo acts as a form of ritualized social control that encourages people to act in ways that benefit the wider society, such as the prevention of overhunting. 
 A third common dimension of various religions is the promise of access to some form of unique spiritual experience or feeling of immediate connection with a higher power. The pursuit of these indescribable experiences explains one set of motives behind the continued prevalence of religion in Canada and around the world. From this point of view, religion is not so much about thinking a certain way (i.e., a formal belief system) as about feeling a certain way. These experiences can come in several forms: the incredible visions or revelations of the religious founders or prophets (e.g., the experiences of the Buddha, Jesus, or Muhammed), the act of communicating with spirits through the altered states of consciousness used by tribal shamen, or the unique experiences of expanded consciousness accessed by individuals through prayer or meditation. 
 While being exposed to a higher power can be awe inspiring, it can also be intensely overwhelming for those experiencing it. These experiences reveal a form of knowledge that is instantly transformative. The historical example of Saul of Tarsus (later renamed St. Paul the Apostle) in the Christian New Testament is an example. Saul was a Pharisee heavily involved in the persecution of Christians. While on the road to Damascus Jesus appeared to him in a life-changing vision. 
 And as he journeyed, he came near Damascus: and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven: And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. And he trembling and astonished said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do. And the men which journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing a voice, but seeing no man. And Saul arose from the earth; and when his eyes were opened, he saw no man: but they led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus. And he was three days without sight, and neither did eat nor drink (Acts 9:1-22). 
 The experience of divine revelation overwhelmed Saul, blinded him for three days, and prompted his immediate conversion to Christianity. As a result he lived out his life spreading Christianity through the Roman Empire. 
 While specific religious experiences of transformation like Saul’s are often the source or goal of religious practice, established religions vary in how they relate to them. Are these types of experiences open to all members or just those spiritual elites like prophets, shamen, saints, monks, or nuns who hold a certain status? Are practitioners encouraged to seek these experiences or are the experiences suppressed? Is it a specific cultivated experience that is sought through disciplined practice, as in Zen Buddhism, or a more spontaneous experience of divine inspiration, like the experience of speaking in tongues in Evangelical congregations? Do they occur quite often or are they more rare/singular? Each religion has their own answers to these questions. 
 Finally, the forth common dimension of religion is the formation of specific forms of social organization or community. Durkheim (1915/1964) emphasized that religious beliefs and practices “unite in one single community called a Church, all those who adhere to them,  arguing that one of the key social functions of religion is to bring people together in a unified moral community. Dawson and Thiessen (2014) elaborate on this social dimension shared by all religions. First, the beliefs of a religion gain their credibility through being shared and agreed upon by a group. It is easier to believe if others around you (who you respect) believe as well. Second, religion provides an authority that deals specifically with social or moral issues such as determining the best way to live life. It provides a basis for ethics and proper behaviours, which establish the normative basis of the community. Even as many Canadians move away from traditional forms of religion, many still draw their values and ideals from some form of shared beliefs that are religious in origin (e.g., “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you ). Third, religion also helps to shape different aspects of social life, by acting as a form of social control, and supporting the formation of self-control, that is vital to many aspects of a functional society. Fourth, although it may be on the decline in Canada, places of religious worship function as social hubs within communities, providing a source of entertainment, socialization, and support. 
 By looking at religions in terms of these four dimensions — belief, ritual, experience, and community — sociologists can identify the important characteristics they share while taking into consideration and allowing for the great diversity of the world religions. 
 Origins 
 Beliefs 
 Judaism began in ancient Israel about 4,000 years ago. The prophet Abraham was the first to declare that there was to be only one true God. Moses, centuries later, then led the Jewish people away from slavery in Egypt, which was a defining moment for Judaism. Moses is credited with writing the Torah, the sacred Jewish texts, which consists of the five books of Moses. 
 Followers of Judaism are monotheistic, believing that there is only one true God. Israel is the sacred land of the Jewish people, and it is seen as gift to them — the children of Israel — from God. According to the Torah, Jewish believers must live a life of obedience to God because life itself is a gift granted by God to his disciples (Sanders, 2009). Followers of Judaism live in accordance to the ten commandments revealed to Moses by God on Mount Sinai. These commandments outline the instructions for how to live life according to God. 
 Judaism has many rituals and practices that followers of the faith carry out. Jewish people have strict dietary laws that originate in the Torah, called Kosher laws. The goal of these laws is not a concern for health, but for holiness. Examples of foods that are prohibited include, pig, hare, camel, and ostrich meat, and crustacean and molluscan seafood. Additionally, certain food groups are banned from being consumed when combined, for example, meat and dairy together (Tieman & Hassan, 2015). Other examples of Jewish rituals are the practices of circumcision and Bar and Bat Mitzvahs. These rites of passage for young boys (bar) and young girls (bat) mark the transition into manhood and womanhood. During these celebrations, the coming of age process is celebrated. Jewish followers also carry out multiple prayers each day, reaffirming and demonstrating their reciprocal love with God. 
 Christianity Symbol: The Cross 
 Christianity began in approximately 35 CE — i.e., the date of the crucifixion — in the area of the Middle East that is now known as Israel. Christianity began with recognition of the divinity of Jesus of Nazareth (Dunn, 2003). A poor Jewish man, Jesus was unsatisfied with Judaism and took it upon himself to seek a stronger connection to the word of God defined by the prophets. Thus, Christianity initially developed as a sect of Judaism. It developed into a distinct religion as Jesus developed a stronger following of those who believed that he was the son of God. The crucifixion of Jesus was the first of many tests of faith of Christians (Guy, 2004). A division emerged within Christianity between Eastern Orthodoxy and Roman Catholicism with the division of the Roman Empire into East and West. A second division occurred during the Protestant Reformation when Protestant sects emerged to challenge the authority of the Catholic church and Papacy to be intermediaries between God and Christian believers. 
 At the core, to be Christian is to believe in the trinity of father, son, and holy spirit as one God: the God of love. Out of love for humanity, God allowed his only son to be sacrificed in the crucifixion to expiate their sins. Christians are admonished to love God, and to love their neighbours and enemies “as themselves.  They believe in God’s love for all things, have faith that God is watching over them at all times and that Jesus, the son of God, will return when the world is ready. Jesus is the exemplar of the religion, demonstrating the way in which to be a proper Christian. In the Christian faith, the theodicy, or the way that Christianity explains why God allows bad things happen to good people, is shown through faith in Jesus. If believers follow in Jesus’ footsteps, they will have access to heaven. Unfortunate occurrences are acts of God that test the faith of his followers. Therefore, by maintaining faith in God’s love, Christians are able to carry on with their lives when confronted with tragedy, injustice and suffering 
 There are many rituals and practices that are central to Christianity, known as the sacraments. For example, the sacrament of baptism involves the literal washing of the person with water to represent the cleansing of their sins. Today, the ritual of baptism has become less common, however, historically the process of baptism was considered an integral rite in order to christen the individual and to wipe away their ancestral or original sin (Hanegraaff, 2009). Other sacraments include the Eucharist (or communion), confirmation, penance, anointing the sick, marriage, and Holy Orders (or ordination). However, not all sects of Christianity follow these. One of the core qualities and practices of Christianity is caring for the poor and disadvantaged. Jesus, a poor man himself, fed and nurtured the poor, demonstrating care for all, and is thus seen to be the exemplar of morality (Dunn, 2003). Christian churches are often institutions that demonstrate how to follow Jesus, running charities and food banks, and housing the homeless and the sick. 
 Islam Symbol: Crescent and the Star 
 Originating in Saudi Arabia, Islam is a monotheistic religion that developed in approximately 600 CE. During this time, the society of Mecca was in turmoil. Muhammad, God’s messenger, received the verses of the Quran directly from the Angel Gabriel during a period of isolated prayer on Mt. Hira. He developed a following of people who eventually united Arabia into a single state and faith through military struggle against polytheistic pagans. Followers of the Islamic faith are referred to as Muslims. Today, a division exists with Islam originating from disagreement regarding Muhammad’s legitimate successor. These two groups are known as Sunni’s and Shia’s, the former making up the majority of Muslims. 
 Central to Islam is the belief that the God, Allah, is the only true God and that Muhammad is God’s Messenger, otherwise known as the Prophet. God also demands that Muslims be fearful and subservient to him as He is the master, and the maker of law (Ushama, 2014). In Islamic faith, the Quran is the sacred text that Muslims believe is the direct word of God, dictated by the Angel Gabriel to Muhammad (Ushama, 2014). 
 Islam outlines five pillars that must be upheld by Islamic followers if they are to be true Muslims. 1) Daily recitation of the creed (Shahadah) which states that there is only one God and Muhammad is God’s messenger; 2) Prayer five times daily; 3) Providing financial aid to support poor Muslims and to promote the practice of Islam; 4) Participation in the month long fast during the 9th month of the Islamic calendar; 5) Completion of a pilgrimage to Mecca at least once in their life (“Pillars of Islam,  2008). 
 Hinduism Symbol: Om or Aum 
 Hinduism originated in India and Nepal, however the exact origin of this widespread religion is highly contested. There is no known founder, differing strongly from the other religions discussed here, which have strong origin stories of the individuals that first posited the specific way of religious life (Flood, 1996). 
 The beliefs characteristic of Hinduism are a belief in reincarnation, and a belief that all actions have direct effects, referred to as Karma (Flood, 1996). In contrast with other world religions, Hinduism is not as strongly defined by what followers believe in but instead by what they do. The Dharma is what outlines a Hindu’s duty in life, identifying individuals with a place within the dharmic social stratification system, or the caste system. This classification greatly dictates what a Hindu can and cannot do. Hindu followers believe in one God that is represented by a multitude of sacred forms known as deities (Flood, 1996). In Hindu religion, in death, only the body dies while the soul lives on. Individuals are reincarnated, surviving death to be reborn in a new form. This new form is believed to be dependent on the way in which the individual lived their life, with the proper way being identified as their acting in accordance to the duties of their caste position (Flood, 1996). 
 In the religion of Hinduism, practice is more important than belief. One ritualistic practice that is carried out by Hindu followers is the act of making offerings of incense to the deities. This act of offering is seen as a “mediation  to open to the lines of communication between the sacred and the profane, or the deity and the individual. This correspondence is of great significance to Hindu followers (Flood, 1996). Another widespread ritual practice is yoga, which is a practice of holding postures while focusing on one’s breath. Yoga is used to silence the mind, allowing it to reflect the divine world. This practice brings the believer closer to unification with the divine. 
 Buddhism Symbol: The Dharma Wheel (the eight spokes of this wheel represent the eightfold path). 
 Buddhism refers to the teachings of Guatama Buddha. It originated in India in approximately 600 BCE. Buddha, originally a follower of the Hindu faith, experienced enlightenment, or Bohdi, while sitting under a tree. It was in this moment that Buddha was awakened to the truth of the world, known as the Dharma. Buddha, an ordinary man, taught his followers how to follow the path to Enlightenment. Thus Buddhism does not believe in a divine realm or God as a supernatural being, but instead follows the wisdom of the founder (Rinpoche, 2001). 
 Buddhists are guided through life by the Dharma or four noble truths. 1) The truth that life is impermanent and therefore generates suffering such as sickness or misfortune; 2) The truth that the origin of suffering is due to the existence of desire or craving; 3) The truth that there is a way to bring this suffering to a halt and achieve release from the cycle of suffering and rebirth; 4) The truth of following the eight-fold path as a way to end this suffering (Tsering, 2005). This path consists of the ‘right’ view to carry out one’s life. Buddhists believe in reincarnation, and that one will continue to be reborn, requiring them to continue the study of and dedication to the four noble truths and the eightfold path until Enlightenment is achieved. Only then will the cycle stop. Therefore, the end to suffering is only reached through the cessation of the craving or desire that drives the cycle of rebirth (Tsering, 2005). 
 The noble eight-fold path includes eight prescriptions: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. These outline the “middle path  between the extremes of sensualism and acseticism, which gives rise to true knowledge, peace, and Enlightenment (Tsersing, 2005). A key ritual practice of Buddhism is meditation. This practice is used by followers to learn detachment from desire and gain insight into the inner workings of their mind in order to come to greater understandings of the truth of the world. In the Buddha’s example, meditation on breath or on chanted mantras, which are often key passages of the Buddha’s sutras (teachings), is a key practice to reach the place of Enlightenment or awakening. 
 Making Connection: Social Policy and Debate 
 Residential Schools and the Church 
 Residential schools were a key institution responsible for the undermining of Aboriginal culture in Canada. Residential schools were run by the Canadian government alongside the Anglican, Presbyterian, Roman Catholic, and United Churches (Blackburn, 2012). These schools were created with the purpose of assimilating Aboriginal children into North American culture (Woods, 2013). 
 In 1920 the government legally mandated that all Aboriginal children between the ages of seven and fifteen attend these schools (Blackburn, 2012). They took the children away from their families and communities to remove them from all influence of their Aboriginal identities that could inhibit their assimilation. Many families did not want their children to be taken away and would hide them, until it became illegal (Neeganagwedgin, 2014). Under the Indian Act, they were also not allowed lawyers to fight government action, which added greatly to the systemic marginalization of these people. The churches were responsible for daily religious teachings and daily activities, and the government was in charge of the curriculum, funding, and monitoring the schools (Blackburn, 2012). 
 There were as many as 80 residential schools in Canada by 1931 (Woods, 2013). It was known early on in this system that there were flaws, but they still persisted until the last residential school was abolished in 1996. As we now know, the experience of residential schools for Aboriginal children was traumatic and dreadful. Within the walls of these schools, children were exposed to sexual and physical abuse, malnourishment, and disease. They were not provided with adequate clothing or medical care, and the buildings themselves were unsanitary and poorly built. 
 The Roman Catholic Church created the most residential schools, with the Anglican Church second (Woods, 2013). There has been much debate surrounding the Church’s involvement in these atrocious organizations. Former Primate and Archbishop Michael Peers apologized in 1993 for the Anglican Church’s part in the residential schools. Canada’s first Aboriginal Anglican Bishop Gordon Beardy forgave the Anglican Church in 2001. 
 By 2001, there were more than 8,500 lawsuits against the Churches and Canadian government for their role in the residential schools (Woods, 2013). Because of the Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement, former students of the residential schools are now eligible for $10,000, on top of $3,000 for each year they attended the schools. A lawsuit filed by former students of the Alberni Indian Residential School was one of the first to get to the Supreme Court of Canada, and the first to deem both the government and church equally responsible. 
 Apologies are still being made on behalf of the churches involved in the residential schools, but the effects it has had on the Indigenous peoples and their culture are perpetuating today. The Christian churches and mission groups have done good things for societies, but their role in these residential schools was immoral and unjust to the Aboriginal people. 
 Types of Religious Organization 
 In every society there are different organizational forms that develop for the practice of religion. Sociologists are interested in understanding how these different types of organization affect spiritual beliefs and practices. They can be categorized according to their size and influence into churches (ecclesia or denomination), sects, and cults. This allows sociologists to examine the different types of relationships religious organization has with the dominant religions in their societies and with society itself. 
 A church is a large, bureaucratically organized religious organization that is closely integrated into the larger society. Two types of church organizations exist. The first is the ecclesia, a church that has formal ties with the state. Like the Anglican Church of England, an ecclesia has most or all of a state’s citizens as its members. As such, the ecclesia forms the national or state religion. People ordinarily do not join an ecclesia, instead they automatically become members when they are born. Several ecclesiae exist in the world today, including Salifi Islam in Saudi Arabia, the Catholic Church in Spain, the Lutheran Church in Sweden, and, as noted above, the Anglican Church in England. 
 In an ecclesiastic society there may be little separation of church and state, because the ecclesia and the state are so intertwined. Many modern states deduct tithes automatically from citizen’s salaries on behalf of the state church. In some ecclesiastic societies, such as those in the Middle East, religious leaders rule the state as theocracies — systems of government in which ecclesiastical authorities rule on behalf of a divine authority — while in others, such as Sweden and England, they have little or no direct influence. In general, the close ties that ecclesiae have to the state help ensure they will support state policies and practices. For this reason, ecclesiae often help the state solidify its control over the populace. 
 The second type of church organization is the denomination, a religious organization that is closely integrated into the larger society but is not a formal part of the state. In modern religiously pluralistic nations, several denominations coexist. In Canada, for example, the United Church, Catholic Church, Anglican Church, Presbyterian Church, Christian and Missionary Alliance, and the Seventh-day Adventists are all Christian denominations. None of these denominations claim to be Canada’s national or official church, but exist instead under the formal and informal historical conditions of separation between church and state. 
 So historically, in Canada, denominationalism developed formally (as a result of the Treaty of Paris in 1763, which granted Roman Catholics the freedom to practice their religion) and informally (as a result of the immigration of people with different faiths during the expansion of settlement of Canada in the 19th and early 20th centuries). Under the model of denominationalism, many different religious organizations compete for people’s allegiances, creating a kind of marketplace for religion. In the United States, this is a formal outcome of the Constitutional 1st Amendment protections (“Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof ). In Canada, “freedom of religion  was not constitutionally protected until the introduction of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms in 1982. 
 A relatively recent development in religious denominationalism is the rise of the so-called megachurch in the United States, a church at which more than 2,000 people worship every weekend on the average (Priest, Wilson, & Johnson, 2010; Warf & Winsberg, 2010). These are both denominational and non-denominational, (meaning not officially aligned with any specific established religious denomination). About one-third are nondenominational, and one-fifth are Southern Baptist, with the remainder primarily of other Protestant denominations. Several dozen have at least 10,000 worshippers and the largest U.S. mega church, in Houston, has more than 35,000 worshippers, nicknamed a “gigachurch.  There are more than 1,300 mega churches in the United States — a steep increase from the 50 that existed in 1970 — and their total membership exceeds 4 million. 
 Compared to traditional, smaller churches, mega churches are more concerned with meeting their members’ non-spiritual, practical needs in addition to helping them achieve religious fulfillment. They provide a “one-stop shopping  model of religion. Some even conduct market surveys to determine these needs and how best to address them. As might be expected, their buildings are huge by any standard, and they often feature bookstores, food courts, and sports and recreation facilities. They also provide day care, psychological counseling, and youth outreach programs. Their services often feature electronic music and light shows. Despite their popularity, they have been criticized for being so big that members are unable to develop close bonds with each other and with members of the clergy that are characteristic of smaller houses of worship. On the other hand, supporters say that mega churches bring many people into religious worship who would otherwise not be involved. 
 A sect is a small religious body that forms after a group breaks away from a larger religious group, like a church or denomination. Dissidents believe that the parent organization does not practice or believe in the true religion as it was originally conceived (Stark & Bainbridge, 1985). Sects are relatively small religious organizations that are not closely integrated into the larger society. They often conflict with at least some of its norms and values. The Hutterites are perhaps the most well-known example of a contemporary sect in Canada; an Anabaptist group — literally “one who baptizes again  — that broke away from mainstream Christianity in the 16th century. Their migration from Tyrol, Austria, due to persecution eventually lead to their immigration to the Dakotas in the 19th century and then to the Canadian prairies, as conscientious objectors following WWI. 
 Typically, a sect breaks away from a larger denomination in an effort to restore what members of the sect regard as the original views of the religion. Because sects are relatively small, they usually lack the bureaucracy of denominations and ecclesiae, and often also lack clergy who have received official training. Their worship services can be intensely emotional experiences, often more so than those typical of many denominations, where worship tends to be more formal and restrained. Members of many sects typically proselytize and try to recruit new members into the sect. If a sect succeeds in attracting many new members, it gradually grows, becomes more bureaucratic, and, ironically, eventually evolves into a denomination. Many of today’s Protestant denominations began as sects, as did the Hutterites, Mennonites, Quakers, Doukhobors, Mormons, and other groups. 
 A cult or New Religious Movement is a small religious organization that is at great odds with the norms and values of the larger society. Cults are similar to sects but differ in at least three respects. First, they generally have not broken away from a larger denomination and instead originate outside the mainstream religious tradition. Second, they are often secretive and do not proselytize as much. Third, they are at least somewhat more likely than sects to rely on charismatic leadership based on the extraordinary personal qualities of the cult’s leader. 
 Although the term “cult  raises negative images of crazy, violent, small groups of people, it is important to keep in mind that major world religions, including Christianity, Islam, and Judaism, and denominations such as the Mormons all began as cults. Cults, more than other religious organizations, have been subject to contemporary moral panics about brainwashing, sexual deviance, and strange esoteric beliefs. However, research challenges several popular beliefs about cults, including the ideas that they brainwash people into joining them and that their members are mentally ill. In a study of the Unification Church (Moonies), Eileen Barker (1984) found no more signs of mental illness among people who joined the Moonies than in those who did not. She also found no evidence that people who joined the Moonies had been brainwashed into doing so. 
 Another source of moral panic about cults is that they are violent. In fact, most are not violent. Nevertheless, some cults have committed violence in the recent past. In 1995 the Aim Shinrikyo (Supreme Truth) cult in Japan killed 10 people and injured thousands more when it released bombs of deadly nerve gas in several Tokyo subway lines (Strasser & Post, 1995). Two years earlier, the Branch Davidian cult engaged in an armed standoff with federal agents in Waco, Texas. When the agents attacked its compound, a fire broke out and killed 80 members of the cult, including 19 children; the origin of the fire remains unknown (Tabor & Gallagher, 1995). 
 A few cults have also committed mass suicide. More than three dozen members of the Heaven’s Gate cult killed themselves in California, in March 1997, in an effort to communicate with aliens from outer space (Hoffman & Burke, 1997). Some two decades earlier, in 1978, more than 900 members of the People’s Temple cult killed themselves in Guyana under orders from the cult’s leader, the Reverend Jim Jones (Stoen, 1997). Similarly, in Canada, on the morning of October 4th, 1994, a blaze engulfed a complex of luxury condominiums in the resort town of Morin-Heights, Quebec. Firefighters found the bodies of a Swiss couple, Gerry and Collette Genoud, in its ruins. At first it was thought that the fire was accidental, but then news arrived from Switzerland of another odd set of fires at homes owed by the same men who owned the Quebec condominiums. All the fires had been set with improvised incendiary devices, which made the police realize they were dealing with a rare incidence of mass murder suicide involving members of an esoteric religious group known as the Solar Temple. From the recorded and written messages left behind by the group, it is clear that the leaders felt it was time to effect what they called a transit to another reality associated with Sirius. 
 It is important to note that cults or new religious movements are very diverse. They offer spiritual options for people seeking purpose in the modern context of state secularism and religious pluralism. Being intense about one’s religious views often breaks the social norms of largely secular societies, leading to misunderstandings and suspicions. Members of new religions run the risk of being stigmatized and even prosecuted (Dawson, 2007). Modern societies highly value freedom and individual choice, but not when exercised in a manner that defies expectations of what is normal. 
 Making Connections: Case Study 
 Brother XII and the Aquarian Foundation 
 Born as Edward Arthur Wilson, the man known as Brother XII travelled the world as a sailor studying various religions. Even at a young age he claimed to be in touch with supernatural beings (Gorman, 2012). In 1927, having taken the name of Brother XII, Wilson established the Aquarian Foundation at Cedar-by-the-Sea, just south of Nanaimo on Vancouver Island, which expanded to include colonies on nearby De Courcy and Valdez Islands. At its height it had over 2000 followers around the world, many of whom sent over large sums of money. 
 The Aquarian Foundation was based on the teachings on the Theosophical Society, which was an organization formed in New York City in 1875. Theosophy had much in common with the beliefs of Buddhism and Hinduism, such as the belief in reincarnation. It was radically different than the dominant Christian belief of the time. Instead of a separation of the spiritual world and the natural world, spirit and nature were considered to be intertwined in people’s daily lives as one universal life force. Theosophy also promoted the idea that there was a spiritual world beyond death inhabited by evolved spiritual beings, whose wisdom could be accessed through the occult reading of esoteric signs and the intervention of spiritual mediums (Scott, 1997). 
 At the time Brother XII ‘s ambitions seemed reasonable enough and many felt the foundation itself represented the promise of great spiritual renewal for an increasingly materialistic society. Brother XII had his followers build homes and cabins at the foundation’s headquarters at Cedar-by-the-Sea and on De Courcy Island. These isolated areas provided a place to get away from the social pressures of the outside world. However, an insurrection took place when Brother XII announced to his followers that he was the reincarnation of the Egyptian God Osiris. Between 1928 and 1933, a series of trials involving Brother XII occurred, which included allegations of misusing foundation funds and having extramarital affairs. News reports claimed that he used black magic to cause witnesses and several members of the audience to faint (Rutten, 2009). 
 In 1929, as rumours about Wilson’s behaviour spread, the B.C. provincial cabinet dissolved the foundation. Those who remained were subjected to Wilson’s paranoia and became increasingly isolated from the outside world. Wilson himself became increasingly authoritarian and used social pressure to convince members into performing gruelling physical labour that was virtually on the same level as slavery. He did this by telling them these activities were tests of fitness to advance their spirituality. In 1931, the group was finally dissolved and Wilson disappeared from the Nanaimo area along with hundreds of thousands of dollars of Foundation money and Mabel Skottowe (one of the women with whom he was accused of having an extramarital affair). They reportedly left by tugboat and eventually made their way to Switzerland. The majority of reports say that he died in Switzerland in 1934, though some that say he was seen in San Francisco with his lawyer after his alleged death. 
 The story of Brother XII illustrates many themes from the sociology of New Religious Movements and cults. According to Cowan (2015), because most people have little direct knowledge of cults and mainly get their information through sensationalist media reports, cults are easily presented as targets of moral panic for being immoral, extreme or dangerous. The three main accusations that cults face are that they engage in brainwashing, acts of sexual deviance and social isolationism. Each of these accusations applied to the media reports on the Aquarian Foundation although their dominant theme centered on the claim that Brother XII was a fraud. 
 15.2. Sociological Explanations of Religion 
 While some people think of religion as something individual (because religious beliefs can be highly personal), for sociologists religion is also a social institution. Social scientists recognize that religion exists as an organized and integrated set of beliefs, behaviours, and norms centred on basic social needs and values. Moreover, religion is a cultural universal found in all social groups. For instance, in every culture, funeral rites are practiced in some way, although these customs vary between cultures and within religious affiliations. Despite differences, there are common elements in a ceremony marking a person’s death, such as announcement of the death, care of the deceased, disposition, and ceremony or ritual. These universals, and the differences in how societies and individuals experience religion, provide rich material for sociological study. But why does religion exist in the first place? 
 Evolutionary Psychology 
 “Blind Pharisee, cleanse first that [which is] within the cup and platter, that the outside of them may be clean also  (Matthew 23:26, King James Bible); 
 “Let the (husband) employ his (wife)…in keeping clean, in religious duties, in the preparation of his food, and in looking after the household utensils  (9:11, Hindu Laws Of Manu). 
 Despite the conflict that has accompanied religion over the centuries, it still continues to exist, and in some cases thrive. How do we explain the origins and continued existence of religion? We will examine sociological theories below, but first we turn to evolutionary and psychological explanations. 
 Many psychologists explain the rise and persistence of religion in terms of Darwinian evolutionary theory. For this argument, they provide a psychological definition of the core religious experience or state of being common to all religion’s diverse social forms and settings. Psychologist Roger Cloninger (1993) defines this core religious experience as the disposition towards self-transcendence. It has three measurable components: self-forgetfulness (absorption in tasks and the ability to lose oneself in concentration), transpersonal identification (perception of spiritual union with the cosmos and the ability to reduce boundaries of self vs. other), and mysticism (perception or acceptance of things that cannot be rationally explained ). The argument is that because this is a universal phenomenon, it must have a common physiological or genetic basis that is passed on between generations that enhances human survival. 
 According to Charles Darwin all species are involved in a constant battle for survival, using adaptions as their primary weapon against an ever-changing, and hostile environment. Adaptions are genetic, or behavioral traits that are shaped by environmental pressures, and genetic variation. By dissecting religion to a core set of purposes, it can be categorized as an adaption that increases the chances of human survival. All adaptions successfully passed on to future generations aided at one point either in reproduction or survival because the genes that selected for them were passed on. This is the rule of natural selection (Darwin, 1859). 
 Much of evolutionary psychology aims at explaining the possible environments in which certain adaptions were selected. Although religion has the potential to cause unwanted side effects, such as wars, it still provides much greater benefits, by responding to numerous survival problems through collective religious processes. A very specific benefit, for example, is disease prevention. Many historic religions placed an emphasis on cleanliness, comparing it to spiritual purity. Consequently there is also an evolutionary benefit to this religious virtue. During a time period where disease was a constant threat to survival, idealizing cleanliness helped minimize communicable diseases from food, animals, and even humans. 
 Although disease prevention has been an important byproduct of religious practices around the world, evolutionary psychologists argue that the main benefit religion has provided to human survival is the mutual support provided by fellow members. More specifically, religion creates a framework for social cohesion and solidarity, even during times of loss, and grief, which has been a crucial competitive strategy of the human species. Rather than each individual being exclusively concerned with their own survival — in a kind of “survival of the fittest  logic — the religious disposition to self-transcendence provides a mechanism that explains the altruistic core of religious practice and the capacity of individuals to sacrifice themselves for the group or for abstract beliefs. 
 Dean Hamer (2005) for example describes a specific gene that correlates with the capacity for self-transcendence. After his research team isolated an association between the VMAT2 gene sequence and populations who scored high on psychological scales for self-transcendence, Hamer noted these genes were connected to the production of neurotransmitters known as monoamines. The effects of monoamines on the meso-limbic systems in the human body were similar to many stimulant drugs: feelings of euphoria and positive well-being. Moreover, his findings suggested that 40-50% of self-transcendence was heritable. What is striking about this evidence is the implication that evolution has favoured genes that are often displayed in religious populations. Hamer extends the evolutionary argument to suggest that religion, grounded genetically in a neuro-chemical capacity for self-transcendence, provides competitive advantages for the human species in the forms of community well-being (higher rates of reciprocity and social welfare) and longevity (reduction of maladaptive behaviours and increased cleanliness). 
 Many similar effects can be observed in the present environment. Strawbridge, Sherna, Cohen, and Kaplan, (2001) conducted a 30-year longitudinal study on religious attendance and survival. Although they found that weekly religious attendance more often assisted in targeting and reducing maladaptive behaviors such as smoking, it also aided in maintaining social relations, and marriage (Strawbridge et al., 2001). Similar studies show correlations between religious affiliation to Christianity, and the self-perceived happiness of German students (Francis, Robbins, & White, 2003). Evolutionary psychology argues that these modern tendencies to feel happiness during a church congregation to reduce maladaptive behaviours are innate, sculpted by centuries of exposure to religion. 
 Evolutionist Richard Dawkins hypothesized a similar reason why religion has created such a lasting impact on society. His theory is explained by the creation of ‘memes’. Comparable to genes, memes are bits of information that can be imitated and transferred across cultures and generations (Dawkins, 2006). Unlike genes, which are physically contained within the human genome, memes are the units or “genetic material  of culture. As a vocal proponent of atheism, Dawkins believes the idea of God is a meme, working in the human mind the same way as a placebo effect. The God meme contains tangible benefits to human society such as answers to questions about human transcendence and superficial comfort for daily difficulties, but the idea of God itself is a product of the human imagination (Dawkins, 2006). Although a human creation, the God meme is incredibly appealing, and as a result, has continually been passed on through cultural transfusion. 
 The logic of evolutionary psychology suggests that it is possible for religion to be replaced by another mechanism that is more beneficial to human survival. Just as Dawkins hypothesized that religious memes colonized societies around the world, this process could also be applied to secular memes. Modern secular countries provide public institutions that create the same social functions as religion, without the disadvantages of “irrational  religious restrictions based on unverifiable beliefs. The secularization thesis predicts that as societies become modern, religious authority will be replaced with public institutions. As Canada, and other countries develop, perhaps evolution will continue to favour secularization, demoting religion from its central place in social life, and religious conflicts to history textbooks and motel night tables. 
 Karl Marx 
 Where psychological theories of religion focus on the aspects of religion that can be described as products of individual subjective experience — the disposition towards self-transcendence, for example — sociological theories focus on the underlying social mechanisms religion sustains or serves. They tend to suspend questions about whether religious world views are true or not — e.g., does God exist? Is enlightenment achievable through meditation? etc. — and adopt some version of WI Thomas’s (1928) Thomas Theorem: “If men define situations as real, they are real in their consequences.  
 From the point of view of the classical theorists in sociology, Thomas’s theorem was already implicit in the premise that the relationship to religion was a key variable needed to understand the transition from traditional society to modern society. Marx, Durkheim, Weber and other early sociologists lived in a time when the validity of religion had been put into question. Traditional societies had been thoroughly religious societies, whereas modern society corresponded to the declining presence and influence of religious symbols and institutions. Nationalism and class replaced religion as a source of identity. Religion became increasingly a private, personal matter with the separation of church and state. In traditional societies the religious attitude towards the world had been “real in its consequences  for the conduct of life, for institutional organization, for power relations, and all other aspects of life. However, modern societies seemed inevitably to be on the path towards secularization in which people would no longer define religion as real. The question these sociologist grappled with was whether societies could work without the presence of a common religion. 
 Karl Marx explained religion as a product of human creation: “man makes religion, religion does not make man  (Marx, 1844/1977). In his theory, there was no “supernatural  reality or God. Instead religion was the product of a projection. Humans projected an image of themselves onto a supernatural reality, which they then turned around and submitted to in the form of a superhuman God. It is in this context that Marx argued that religion was “the opium of the people  (Marx, 1844/1977). Religious belief was a kind of narcotic fantasy or illusion that prevented people from perceiving their true conditions of existence, firstly as the creators of God, and secondly as beings whose lives were defined by historical, economic and class relations. The suffering and hardship of people, central to religious mythology, were products of people’s location within the class system, not of their relationship to God, nor of the state of their souls. Their suffering was real, but their explanation of it was false. Therefore “religious suffering is at the same time an expression of real suffering and a protest against real suffering.  
 However, Marx was not under the illusion that the mystifications of religion belief would simply disappear, vanquished by the superior knowledge of science and political-economic analysis. The problem of religion was in fact the central problem facing all critical analysis: the attachment to explanations that compensate for real social problems but do not allow them to be addressed. As he said, “the criticism of religion is the supposition [or beginning of] of all criticism  (Marx, 1844/1977). Until humans were able to recognize their power to change their circumstances in “the here and now  rather than “the beyond,  they would be prone to religious belief. They would continue to live under conditions of social inequality and grasp at the illusions of religion in order to cope. The critical sociological approach he proposed would be to thoroughly disillusion people about the rewards of the afterlife and bring them back to earth where real rewards could be obtained through collective action. 
 The demand to give up the illusions about their condition is a demand to give up a condition that requires illusion…. Criticism has plucked the imaginary flowers from the chains not so that man may bear chains without any imagination or comfort, but so that he may throw away the chains and pluck living flowers . The criticism of religion disillusions man so that he may think, act, and fashion his own reality as a disillusioned man come to his senses; so that he may revolve around himself as his real sun. Religion is only the illusory sun which revolves around man as long as he does not revolve around himself (Marx, 1844/1977). 
 Nevertheless, if Marx’s analysis is correct, it is a testament both to the persistence of the social conditions of suffering and to the comforts of holding to illusions, that religion not only continues to exist 170 years after Marx’s critique, but in many parts of the world appears to be undergoing a revival and expansion. 
 Emile Durkheim 
 Emile Durkheim (1859-1917) explained the existence of religion in terms of the functions it performs in society. Like Marx, therefore, he argued that it was necessary to examine religion as a product of society, rather than as a product of a transcendent or supernatural presence (Durkheim, 1915/1964). Unlike Marx, however, he argued that religion fulfills real needs in each society, namely to reinforce certain mental states, sustain social solidarity, establish basic rules or norms, and concentrate collective energies. These can be seen as the universal social functions of religion that underlie the unique natures of different religious systems all around the world, past and present (Sachs, 2011). He was particularly concerned about the capacity of religion to continue to perform these functions as societies entered the modern era in the 19th and 20th centuries. Durkheim hoped to uncover religion’s future in a new world that was breaking away from the traditional social norms that religion had sustained and supported (Durkheim, 1915/1964). 
 The key defining feature of religion for Durkheim was its ability to distinguish sacred things from profane things. In his last published work, The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life, he defined religion as: “a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things, that is to say, things set apart and forbidden – beliefs and practices which unite into one single moral community called a Church, all those who adhere to them  (Durkheim, 1915/1964). Sacred objects are things said to have been touched by divine presence. They are set apart through ritual practices and viewed as forbidden to ordinary, everyday contact and use. Profane objects on the other hand are items integrated into ordinary everyday living. They have no religious significance. From Durkheim’s social scientific point of view, it is the act of setting sacred and profane apart which contributes to their spiritual significance and reverence, rather than anything that actually inheres in them. 
 This basic dichotomy creates two distinct aspects of life, that of the ordinary and that of the sacred, that exist in mutual exclusion and in opposition to each other. This is the basis of numerous codes of behavior and spiritual practices. Durkheim argues that all religions, in any form and of any culture, share this trait. Therefore, a belief system, whether or not it encourages faith in a supernatural power, is identified as a religion of it outlines this divide and creates ritual actions and a code of conduct of how to interact with and around these sacred objects. 
 Durkheim examined the social functions of the division of the world into sacrd and profane by studying a group of Australian Aboriginals that practiced totemism. He described totemism as the most basic and ancient forms of religion, and therefore the core of religious practice itself (Durkheim, 1915/1964). A totem, such as an animal or plant, is a sacred “symbol, a material expression of something else  such as a spirit or a god. Totemic societies are divided into clans based on the different totemic creatures each clan revered. In line with his argument that religious practice needs to be understood in sociological terms rather than supernatural terms, he noted that totemism existed to serve some very specific social functions. For example, the sanctity of the objects venerated as totems infuse the clan with a sense of social solidarity because they bring people together and focus their attention on the shared practice of ritual worship. They function to divide the sacred from the profane thereby establishing a ritually reinforced structure of social rules and norms, they enforce the social cohesion of the clans through the shared belief in a transcendent power, and they protect members of the society from each other since they all become sacred as participants in the religion. 
 In essence, totemism, like any religion, is merely a product of the members of a society projecting themselves and the real forces of society onto ‘sacred’ objects and powers. In Durkheim’s terms, all religious belief and ritual function in the same way. They create a collective consciousness and a focus for collective effervescence in society. Collective consciousness is the shared set of values, thoughts, and ideas that come into existence when the combined knowledge of a society manifests itself through a shared religious framework (Mellor & Shilling, 1996). Collective effervescence, on the other hand, is the elevated feeling experienced by individuals when they come together to express beliefs and perform rituals together as a group: the experience of an intense and positive feeling of excitement (Mellor & Shilling, 2011). In a religious context, this feeling is interpreted as a connection with divine presence, as being filled with the spirit of supernatural forces, but Durkheim argues that in reality it is the material force of society itself, which emerges whenever people come together and focus on a single object. As individuals actively engage in communal activities, their belief system gains plausibility and the cycle intensifies. In worshipping the sacred, people worship society itself, finding themselves together as a group, reinforcing their ties to one another and reasserting solidarity of shared beliefs and practices (Mellor & Shilling, 1998). 
 The fundamental principles that explain the most basic and ancient religions like totemism, also explain the persistence of religion in society as societies grow in scale and complexity. However, in modern societies where other institutions often provide the basic for social solidarity, social norms, collective representations, and collective effervescence, will religious belief and ritual persist? 
 In his structural-functional analysis of religion, Durkheim outlined three functions that religion still serves in society, which help to explain its ongoing existence in modern societies. First, religion ensures social cohesion through the creation of a shared consciousness form participation in rituals and belief systems. Second, it formally enforces social norms and expectations of behavior, which serve to ensure predictability and control of human action. Third, religion serves to answer the most universal, ‘meaning of life’ questions that humans have pondered since the dawn of consciousness. As long as the needs remain unsatisfied by other institutions in modern social systems, religion will exist to fill that void. 
 Making Connections: Classical Sociology 
 Émile Durkheim on Religion 
 Durkheim’s father was the eighth in a line of father-son rabbis. Although Émile was the second son, he was chosen to pursue his father’s vocation and was given a good religious and secular education. He abandoned the idea of a religious or rabbinical career, however, and became very secular in his outlook. His sociological analysis of religion in The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life (1915/1964) was an example of this. In this work he was not interested in the theological questions of God’s existence or purpose, but in developing a very secular, sociological question: Whether God exists or not, how does religion function socially in a society? 
 He argued that beneath the irrationalism and the “barbarous and fantastic rites  of both the most primitive and the most modern religions is their ability to satisfy real social and human needs (Durkheim, 1915/1964). “There are no religions which are false,  he said. Religion performs the key function of providing social solidarity in a society. The rituals, the worship of icons, and the belief in supernatural beings “excite, maintain or recreate certain mental states  that bring people together, provide a ritual and symbolic focus, and unify them. This type of analysis became the basis of the functionalist perspective in sociology. He explained the existence and persistence of religion on the basis of the necessary function it performed in unifying society. 
 Max Weber 
 If Marx’s analysis represents the classical sociological formulation of the critical perspective on religion, and Durkheim’s the functionalist formulation, Max Weber’s analysis represents the classical formulation of the interpretive perspective on religion within sociology. His approach was to determine the meaning of religion in the conduct of life for members of society. Three key themes concerning religion emerge from his work: the concept of theodicy, the disenchantment of the world, and the Protestant Ethic. 
 One of Weber’s explanations for the origin and persistence of religion in society concerns its role in providing a meaningful explanation for the unequal “distribution of fortunes among men  (Weber, 1915 (1958)). As described earlier in the chapter, this is religion’s unique ability and authority to provide a theodicy: an explanation for why all-powerful Gods allow suffering, misfortune and injustice to occur, even to “good people  who follow the moral and spiritual practices of their religion. Religious theodicies resolve the contradiction between “destiny and merit (Weber, 1915 (1958)). They give meaning to why good or innocent people experience misfortune and suffering. Religion’s exist therefore because they (successfully) claim the authority to provide such explanations. 
 Weber describes three dominant forms of theodicy in world religions: dualism, predestination and karma. In dualistic religions like Zoroastrianism, the power of a god is limited by the powers of evil–“the powers of light and truth, purity and goodness coexist and conflict with the powers of darkness and falsehood  (Weber, 1915 (1958))–and therefore suffering is explained as a consequence of the struggle between the dual powers of good and evil, gods and demons, in which evil occasionally wins out. The doctrine of predestination, which became very important in Weber’s theory of Calvinism and the Protestant Ethic (see below), explains suffering as the outcome of a destiny that a god has pre-assigned to individuals. God’s reasoning is invisible to believers and therefore inscrutable. Therefore believers must accept that there is a higher divine reason for their suffering and continue to strive to be good. Finally, the belief in karma, central to religions such as Hinduism and Buddhism, explains suffering as a product of acts one committed in former lives. Individuals must struggle in this life to rectify the evils accumulated from previous lives. Each form of theodicy provides “rationally satisfying answers  to persistent questions about why gods permit suffering and misfortune without undermining the obligation of believers to pursue the religion’s values. 
 Weber’s analysis of religion was concerned not only with why religion exists, but with the role it played in social change. In particular, he was interested in the development of the modern worldview which he equated with the widespread processes of rationalization: the general tendency of modern institutions and most areas of life to be transformed by the application of technical reason, precise calculation, and rational organization. Again, central to his interpretivist framework, how people interpreted and saw the world provided the basis for an explanation of the types of social organization they created. In this regard, one of his central questions was to determine why rationalization emerged in the West and not the East. Eastern societies in China, India, and Persia had been in many respects more advanced culturally, scientifically and organizationally than Europe for most of world history, but had not taken the next step towards developing thoroughly modern, rationalized forms of organization and knowledge. The relationship to religion formed a key part of his answer. 
 One component of rationalization was the process Weber described as the disenchantment of the world, which refers to the elimination of a superstitious or magical relationship to nature and life. Weber noted that many societies prevented processes of rationalization from occurring because of religious interdictions and restrictions against certain types of development. He describes, for example, the way Chinese geomancy interfered with the construction of railroads in China because because building structures “on certain mountains, forests, rivers, and cemetery hills  threatened to “disturb the rest of the spirits  (Weber, 1966). A contemporary example might be the beliefs concerning the sacredness of human life, which serve to restrict experimenting with human stem cells or genetic manipulation of the human genome. In modernity, the fundamental orientation to the world becomes increasingly disenchanted in the sense that “mysterious incalculable forces  of a spiritual or sacred nature no longer “come into play  in peoples understanding of it. Rather, “one can, in principle, master all things by calculation.  When the world becomes disenchanted, “one need no have recourse to magical means in order to master or implore the spirits, as did the savage, for whom such mysterious powers existed. Technical means and calculations perform the service  (Weber, 1919 (1958)). For Weber, disenchantment was one source for the rapid development and power of Western society, but also a source of irretrievable loss. 
 A second component of rationalization, particularly as it applies to the rise of capitalism as a highly rationalized economic system, was the formation of the Protestant Ethic. This will be discussed more fully below. The key point to note here is that Weber makes the argument that a specific ethic or way of life that developed among a few Protestant sects on the basis of religious doctrine or belief, (i.e. a way of interpreting the world and the role of humans within it), became a central material force of social change. The restrictions that religions had imposed on economic activities and that had prevented them from being pursued in a purely rational, calculative manner, were challenged or subverted by the emergence and spread of new, equally religious, forms of belief and practice. However, the irony that Weber noted in the relationship between the Protestant sects and the rise of capitalism, was that while the Protestant’s “duty to work hard in one’s calling  persisted, the particular beliefs in God that produced this “ethic  were replaced by secular belief systems. Capitalist rationality dispensed with religious belief but remained “haunted by the ghosts of dead religious beliefs  (Weber 1904 (1958)). 
 Making Connections: Classical Sociology 
 Max Weber on the Protestant Work Ethic 
 Weber is known best for his 1904 book, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. He noted that in modern industrial societies, business leaders and owners of capital, the higher grades of skilled labour, and the most technically and commercially trained personnel were overwhelmingly Protestant. He also noted the uneven development of capitalism in Europe, and in particular how capitalism developed first in those areas dominated by Protestant sects. He asked, “Why were the districts of highest economic development at the same time particularly favourable to a revolution in the Church?  (i.e., the Protestant Reformation (1517–1648)) (Weber 1904 (1958)). His answer focused on the development of the Protestant Ethic—the duty to “work hard in one’s calling —in particular Protestant sects such as Calvinism, Pietism, and Baptism. 
 As opposed to the traditional teachings of the Catholic Church in which poverty was a virtue and labour simply a means for maintaining the individual and community, the Protestant sects began to see hard, continuous labour as a spiritual end in itself. Hard labour was firstly an ascetic technique of worldly renunciation and a defense against temptations and distractions: the unclean life, sexual temptations, and religious doubts. Secondly, the doctrine of predestination among the Protestant sects believed that God’s disposition toward the individual was predetermined and could never be known or influenced by traditional Christian practices like confession, penance, and buying indulgences. However, one’s chosen occupation was a “calling  given by God, and the only sign of God’s favour or recognition in this world was to receive good fortune in one’s calling. Thus material success and the steady accumulation of wealth through personal effort and prudence was seen as a sign of an individual’s state of grace. Weber argued that the ethic, or way of life, that developed around these beliefs was a key factor in creating the conditions for both the accumulation of capital, as the goal of economic activity, and for the creation of an industrious and disciplined labour force. 
 In this regard, Weber has often been seen as presenting an interpretivist explanation of the development of capital, as opposed to Marx’s historical materialist explanation. It is an element of cultural belief that leads to social change rather than the concrete organization and class struggles of the economic structure. It might be more accurate, however, to see Weber’s work building on Marx’s analysis of capitalism and to see his Protestant Ethic thesis as part of a broader set of themes concerning the process of rationalization: the general tendency of modern institutions and most areas of life to be transformed by the application of instrumental reason—rational bureaucratic organization, calculation, and technical reason—and the overcoming of “magical  thinking (which we earlier referred to as the “disenchantment of the world ). As the impediments toward rationalization were removed, organizations and institutions were restructured on the principle of maximum efficiency and specialization, while older, traditional (i.e. inefficient) types of organization were gradually eliminated because they could not compete. 
 The irony of the Protestant Ethic as one stage in this process is that the rationalization of capitalist business practices and organization of labour eventually dispensed with the religious goals of the ethic. At the end of The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, Weber pessimistically describes the fate of modern humanity as an “iron cage.  The iron cage is Weber’s metaphor for the condition of modern humanity in a technical, rationally defined, and “efficiently  organized society. Having forgotten the spiritual (and other) goals of life, humanity succumbs to the goals of pure efficiency: an order “now bound to the technical and economic conditions of machine production  (Weber 1904 (1958)). The modern subject in the iron cage is “only a single cog in an ever-moving mechanism which prescribes to him [or her] an essentially fixed route of march  (Weber 1922 (1958)). 
 Peter Berger 
 Peter Berger’s The Sacred Canopy (1967) is a modern sociological attempt to create a comprehensive explanation of religion. Berger’s approach to religion is based on the phenomenological perspective in sociology. Phenomenology seeks to describe the way in which all phenomena, including religion, arise as perceptions within the immediate sensorial experience and awareness of individual subjects. Phenomenologists study the ways in which the world, and ourselves within it, first come to presence in experience and only later become separate objects, social structures or selves. The founder of phenomenology, Edmund Husserl argued that only by “returning to things themselves  at this primary level of experience could the ground of scientific knowledge be established (Abram, 1997). For Berger, prior to the division of the world into subjects and objects and prior to any specific “knowledge  we form about it, religion also comes to presence as an awareness which only later takes on the specific qualities and meanings of the sacred. Religion is only secondarily a structure, institution, practice, or set of beliefs. Berger’s question was, how does it come to do so for different individuals in a consistent manner? How do humans go from the flux of immediate perception to a religious worldview? 
 For Berger, religion is a particular type of culture (Berger 1967). Like culture, it is a human creation that develops in response to the fundamental human condition: humans lack in-borne biological programming to help them cope with the problems of physical survival. Berger explains that, unlike other animals, human survival depends on creating cultural knowledges, techniques, and technologies, and passing them down from generation to generation. In order for humans to survive, the world must be culturally prepared as a world in which things and people have stable meanings. Whereas animals might simply be able to smell that certain mushrooms are poisonous, children must learn the difference between what is poisonous and non-poisonous based on their culture’s taxonomy of plants. Culture, Berger argues, exists therefore as an artifice that mediates between humans and nature and provides needed stability and predictability in human life. From the phenomenological point of view, culture enables both the ongoing creation of the world as a stable, objective social reality outside the subject and the simultaneous creation, or interiorization, of social roles and social expectations within the subject. On the basis of the cultural processes objectification and interiorization, a stable, regular, predictable, taken for granted, reassuring world–or nomos (i.e. normative order)–is created. 
 Religion develops because the stability of culture is inherently fragile. Just as the immediate experience of the individual is subject to flux and change, so is the foundation of the ordered, meaningful world of culture. Cultural meanings tend to be fixed and rigid through time, whereas the underlying reality they describe is not. Events occur that are not explainable. They fall outside the categories and threaten to put the whole cultural framework or nomos into question. Berger states that “every nomos is an edifice erected in the face of the potent and alien forces of chaos  (Berger, 1967). Religion comes into existence as a solution to this problem. Religion is able to resolve the threat of instability and terror of anomie by postulating a supernatural agency or cosmological view of the world, which are unaffected by everyday inconstancy and uncertainty. In a religious cosmology the order described by culture is the natural order, that is, it is the way the gods have decided things must be. Things that occur that cannot be explained in human terms are explained as the products of divine will. 
 For Berger, religion therefore provides an “ultimate shield  for humanity—a sacred canopy–because it protects the meaningful world of the cultural order and fixes it in place by reference to a divinity that exists outside of the fragile human order. Religion is therefore a source of ultimate legitimation because it provides the social order with an unquestionable foundation of legitimacy: the way things are is the will of the gods. From a phenomenological point of view however, the price of this religious solution is a mode of forgetfulness and alienation. For the legitimation effect of religion to work and be plausible, humans must forget that they themselves have created religion. They must forget that religion is a human accomplishment. 
 In The Sacred Canopy, Berger argued that the processes of secularization will eventually erode the plausibility of religious belief. For religion to function as a sacred canopy and ultimate legitimation, it must provide the foundation for a shared belief system. In modern societies however, other types of knowledge and expert systems like science assume greater authority to describe the nature of the world and our role within it. Modern societies become more pluralistic as well, in the sense that a multiplicity of cultural and religious systems compete to provide meaning and orientation in peoples lives. Berger also noted the tendency for religion to become “privatized  in modern society. With the separation of church and state in the modern state system, religion has been increasingly seen as a matter of private, individual choice or a matter of private, family belief rather than the center of collective or public life. Therefore, because (a) pluralism undermines the ability of any single religion to offer an ultimate source of stability for society and because (b) the isolated, private beliefs of individuals cannot be the basis of a common shared cosmological order, religion will undergo a crisis in plausibility from which it is unlikely to recover. As we will see below in Section 15.3, however Berger (1999) felt obliged to revise his prediction about the demise of religion in the face of the contemporary religious revivals by Pentacostals, Muslims and others. 
 Rodney Stark 
 In the 1980’s American sociologist Rodney Stark developed another significant and influential theory of religion. He, along with his colleague William Bainbridge, set out to create a systematic and predictive theory of religion that could be empirically tested based on the principles of rational choice theory (Stark & Bainbridge, 1985, [1987] 1996). Despite the dominant expectation that modern societies were becoming ever more secular, Stark believed that religion was, and would continue to be, an important and influential factor for individuals and society. “[S]o long as humans intensely seek certain rewards of great magnitude that remain unavailable through direct actions, they will be able to obtain credible compensators only from sources predicated on the supernatural  (Stark & Bainbridge, 1985). 
 For the last two centuries sociologists have been predicting religion’s ultimate demise in the face of modernity, but Stark argues that this has simply not happened (Stark & Bainbridge, 1996). He contends that “the vision of a religionless future is but illusion  (Stark & Bainbridge, 1985). Stark notes that church membership and new religious movements have actually increased in the United States as the country modernized. In Europe, where religious participation is relatively low, levels of individual belief nevertheless remain high and participation has not undergone a long-term decline (Stark, 1999b). What explanation can be provided for the persistence of religion? 
 Stark begins with the stipulation that the importance of the supernatural must be recognized when studying religion. Belief in a higher force or power is the feature that distinguishes religions from non-religious beliefs and organizations. Any theory of religion must take this into account. Yet the question inevitably arises: why do people in a rational, material world continue to hold these ‘irrational’ beliefs in the supernatural? 
 Stark attempts to answer this question by proposing a number of basic, general rules about humans and their behavior. The most fundamental of these is from rational choice theory, namely that humans seek rewards and avoid costs (Stark & Bainbridge, 1985). Rational choice theory states that the most basic human motive is individual self-interest, and that all social activities are a product of rational decision making in which individuals continuously weigh the benefits of choices against their costs (Scott, 2014). A person who has a choice between two jobs, for example, would weigh the rewards of each one such as higher pay or better benefits against the possible costs of longer work hours or further commutes. Individuals will on balance choose the course of action that maximizes their rewards and minimizes their costs. 
 Of course an individual’s attempts to make rational choices are confined by their personal knowledge, understanding, and beliefs about the available options. In this sense, even seemingly irrational decisions or beliefs can be understood as rational choices from the point of view of the individual decision maker (Stark, 1999a). Religious belief in the supernatural may seem irrational from an outside perspective because it involves an orientation to invisible, supernatural powers that affect the everyday material world through unobservable mechanisms. However, for the religious believer whose worldview is shaped by this assumption, it is completely rational that they would choose to worship and make offerings to these supernatural powers in the hopes of gaining rewards and avoiding wrath or misfortune. Moreover, by participating in religious practice, people also surround themselves with other believers who make the rationality of supernatural choices even more plausible. 
 According to Stark, the rewards people desire most intensely are often scarce or not available at all, such as an end to suffering or eternal life. Consequently, when such rewards cannot be attained through direct means, humans will create and exchange compensators. These are promises or IOUs of a reward at an unspecified future date, along with an explanation of how they can be acquired. The individual accepts the promise of a future reward like eternal life after death in compensation for not being able to have it here and now, but “pays  for it upfront so to speak through the “costs  of a lifetime of religious devotion, ritual observance, self-denial and faith (Stark & Bainbridge, 1985). 
 Stark argues that rewards such as these are so monumental and scarce that they can only be provided through a supernatural source. “Systems of thought that reject the supernatural lack all means to credibly promise such rewards as eternal life in any fashion  (Stark & Bainbridge, 1985). This is why religious belief persists. In other words, a person must believe that a supernatural power exists which is capable of providing this reward in order to rationally believe that it is attainable. In this sense, religious belief and practice are rational choices humans make to get the most coveted rewards regarding human existence. Religious organizations function to provide compensators for these rewards by claiming to provide access to supernatural powers or deities. 
 For Stark, this is the root of why religion continues to exist in the modern world, and why it will continue to persist. For as long as people desire solutions to the most essential human questions, and these are not provided by other sources, there will be a rational cost/benefit analysis that favours the choice to exchange religious devotion and practice for future spiritual “pay offs.  
 From there Stark develops his theory, aptly referred to as the “rational choice theory of religion,  to generate 344 deductive, testable propositions which offer explanations to nearly every aspect of religion. For example, he proposes that “as societies become older, larger and more cosmopolitan they will worship fewer gods of greater scope  (Stark & Bainbridge, 1996). By using a positivist approach, Stark creates a theory where every proposition, including this one, can in principle be tested. The proposition above could be verified by examining the number of gods and their powers in the religions of small, traditional societies and comparing that to the number of gods worshipped in more established, modern ones. 
 In reality however, many of the propositions are difficult to test because the concepts he uses are hard to measure or compare between religions. How does one empirically quantify the scope of a certain god and compare it to that of an unrelated god from a different religion? His theory has also been critiqued for having an inherent bias towards monotheistic and particularly Protestant Christian measures of religion (Carroll, 1996). In other words, he places higher value on measures of religiosity that fit the Protestant model, such as belief and adherence to doctrine, over those that better describe other religions, such as the ritual aspects of Hinduism or Catholicism. His work may then implicitly suggest that Protestants are more religious than the others based on these skewed measures of religiousness. Despite these criticisms, Stark’s theory continues to hold merit for its systematic and broad approach to looking at all facets of religion to explain the reasons for the persistence of religious beliefs today. 
 Feminist Approaches to Religion 
 Feminist theories of religion analyze and critique the ways in which sacred texts and religious practices portray and subordinate—or empower—women, femininity, and female sexuality (Zwissler, 2012). Theorists within this area of study look at religion’s contribution to the oppression or empowerment of women within society, as well as provide analyses of the challenges that women face within different religious practices. The crucial insight into religion that forms the basis for feminist research is the gendered nature of religion (Erikson, 1992). Women’s place and experience within religious traditions differ significantly from men’s. Feminists therefore argue that questions about gender are essential for a meaningful analysis and explanation of religion. 
 In one line of inquiry, feminist theorists of religion have analyzed the representation of women within sacred religious texts, identifying and critiquing the way women are portrayed. For example, the gender of the deity is an issue for women, particularly in the monotheistic Abrahamic religions such as Christianity, Islam, and Judaism (Zwissler, 2012). God, within these religious beliefs, is usually understood as male. Mary Daly (1973), a feminist theologian, famously stated, “if God is male, then the male is God.  Individuals within these religious practices are socialized to see men and the qualities of masculinity as having greater importance than women and the qualities femininity, thus perpetuating the rationales and gender ideologies that legitimate women’s subordination in society. The question this raises is whether religion is therefore the direct cause of misogyny—the aversion or distaste for people of the female sex, including belittling, sexual objectification, sexual violence, and discrimination against women—or whether male-dominated religious practices are the product of broader gendered inequalities and societal norms outside of religion (Zwissler, 2012)? 
 A second line of inquiry focuses on why power relationships within religious institutions are typically gendered (Erikson, 1992). Feminist theorists note that women are frequently prevented from holding positions of power within religious practice. Ministers, imams, rabbis, buddhas, and Brahmin priests are positions within religious hierarchies which have traditionally excluded women. Despite this, cross-culturally women are proportionately more religious than men. Surveys across North America and Europe demonstrate that more women identify as being religious than men, have deeper levels of religiosity than men, and attend church more regularly tan men by a ratio of 3:2 (Dawson & Thiessen, 2014). This can be seen as a paradox within feminist religious studies. In an ideal meritocracy, spiritual elites would be chosen from those with the most spiritual “experience,  but this is not the case. 
 Linda Woodhead’s (2007) research seeks to examine the question of why more women than men identify as being religious when religions are typically patriarchal, both in their contents and their institutional hierarchies. Her key insight is that women’s position in patriarchal religion is not monolithic. Women differ in how they “negotiate  their gender status and their religious practice. Placed along two axes (see Figure 15.23) , Woodhead identifies four distinct religious “strategies  women adopt to position themselves within the dominant religious narrative (“mainstream  or “marginal ) and with respect to the religious status quo (“confirmatory  or “challenging ): 
 The consolidating strategy of women who accept the existing gendered distribution of power within their religion as a means of affirming and consolidating the security and predictability that traditional gender roles provide; 
 The tactical strategy of women who take part in and use religion in order to have the intimate interaction and support of other women; 
 The questing strategy of women who seek out different forms of religion like New Age spiritualties, meditation or Wikka in order to find fulfilment through an inner spiritual quest (rather than addressing the social power structures of religion directly); 
 The counter-cultural strategy of women that reject traditional religion and create religious communities that focus on empowering women (eg. the goddess feminist movement of Starhawk and others). 
 The challenges faced by women are different within each religion, and therefore the strategies women of faith use to change or work within their respective religion may vary. Woodhead’s model emphasizes however that women are not simply manipulated by religious traditions but exercise agency, albeit with different orientations and goals (Woodhead, 2007). 
 Being an interdisciplinary perspective, feminism brings a diversity of voices into the discussion, illuminating important issues of inequality, oppression, and power imbalance, all of which are of great importance to the study of sociology. Through analysis of the gender structures within religious practices worldwide, a deeper understanding of how different cultures and traditions function is revealed. The understanding that women frequently do not identify as being oppressed by their religion is an important insight in trying to fully understand the nature of gendered religious practice on a global scale. 
 15.3. Religion and Social Change 
 Religion has historically been a major impetus to social change. In early Europe, the translation of sacred texts into everyday, non-scholarly language empowered people to shape their religions. Disagreements between religious groups and instances of religious persecution have led to mass resettlement, war, and even genocide. To some degree, the modern sovereign state system and international law might be seen as products of the conflict between religious beliefs as these were founded in Europe by the Treaty of Westphalia (1648), which ended the Thirty Years War. As outlined below, Canada is no stranger to religion as an agent of social change. Nevertheless debate continues in sociology concerning the nature of religion and social change particularly in three areas: secularization, religious diversity, and new religious movements. 
 Secularization 
 Loek Halman and Erik van Ingen argue that “[f]or centuries, religion was regarded as a more or less obvious pillar of people’s moral views,  but since the 19th century it steadily lost significance in society while the sources of people’s opinions and moral values became more diverse. Secularization refers to the decline of religiosity as a result of the modernization of society. More precisely, secularization “refers to the process by which religion and the sacred gradually have less validity, influence, and significance in society and the lives of individuals  through the impact of modern processes like rationalization, pluralism, and individualism (Dawson and Thiessen, 2014). For example, while in 1957 82% of Canadians were official members of church congregations, only 29% were in 1990 (Bibby, 1993). According to Statistics Canada’s 2011 census, 7,850,605 Canadians had no religious affiliation, making them the second largest group after Catholics at 12,810,705. This is a large increase from the 202,025 Canadians who claimed no religious affiliation in the 1971 Statistics Canada census (Statistics Canada, 2015). 
 Sociologists suggest that it is important to distinguish between three different types of secularization: societal secularization, organizational secularization, and individual secularization. Karel Dobbelaere (2002) defines societal secularization as “the shrinking relevance of the values, institutionalized in church religion, for the integration and legitimation of everyday life in modern society.  In Quebec until the early 1960s for example, the Catholic Church was the dominant institution in the province, providing health care, education, welfare, municipal boundaries (parishes), records of births and deaths as well as religious services, but with the modernization programme of the LaSalle government during the “Quiet Revolution  the state took over most of these tasks. Organizational secularization refers to the “modernization of religion  from within, namely the efforts made by religious organizations themselves to update their beliefs and practices to reflect changes in contemporary life. The move to ordinate female ministers to reflect the growing gender equality in society or the use of commercial marketing techniques to attract congregations are examples. Individual secularization is the decline in involvement in churches and denominations or the decline in belief and practice of individual members. 
 As we saw earlier in the chapter, the equation of secularization with modernity has been the view of many important sociologists including Marx, Durkheim, and Weber. But in more recent years there has been a growing number of sociologists who question the universality of the process of secularization and propose that contemporary society is going through a period of religious revitalization. Peter Berger (1999) for example reversed the secularization thesis he proposed in The Sacred Canopy (1967), when he noted that most of the world is as “furiously religious as it ever was, and in some places more so than ever.  A religious resurgence is evident in particular in the growth in Islam around the world as well as in the growth and export of Pentecostalism in and from the United States. Similarly, Fink and Stark (2005) have argued that Americans, at least, actually became more religious as American society modernized. Even in Europe, where church attendance is very low, they suggest that religious practice is stable rather than in long term decline and that people still hold religious beliefs like the belief in God or life after death. 
 However, Canada, like most of Europe, appears to be an exception to the trend of religious resurgence, meaning there has been less of an emergence of new and revived religious groups, as opposed to the U.S. and the rest of the world. Prior to the 1960s Canada was a more religious nation than the United States, now it is much less religious by any standard measure. Nevertheless, Reginald Bibby’s research (2011) on religiosity in Canada describes a situation that is more complicated than the secularization thesis suggests. Rather than a progressive and continuous process of secularization, Bibby argues that there have been three consecutive trends in Canada since the 1960s: secularization, revitalization and polarization. After a period of steady secularization between the 1950s and 1990 (measured by levels of church attendance), Bibby presents evidence of revitalization in the 1990s including small increases in weekly or monthly attendance for different age groups. He also notes the four fold increase of non-Christians (Muslims, Buddhists, Jews) in Canada since the 1950s, the high level of spiritual belief among people who do not attend church, the way that many people retain connections with churches for special occasions, and surveys that report that many would consider attending regularly if organizational or personal factors could be addressed. Since the 1990s, Bibby describes a third trend of polarization, with the public increasingly divided into opposite poles of the highly religious and the non-religious. However, according Dawson and Thiessen, this last trend identified by Bibby does not take into account the almost 50% of the population who are in the middle (i.e., neither highly religious nor completely non-religious), nor the fact that longitudinal measures of religious belief and religiosity show the trend to continued decreases among the highly religious and increases to the non-religious (Dawson and Thiessen, 2014). 
 Overall it can be said that understanding secularization and desecularization is an essential part of the sociological analysis of religion. Knowing the relationship between modernity and religion provides insight into the complex dynamics of the late modern world and allows sociologists to predict what is to come for religion in the future. The question is whether secularization necessarily accompanies modernization or whether there is a cyclical process between secularization and religious revivalism. Are secular or non-secular societies the exceptions to the dominant trend of modern society? The revised thesis that Peter Berger offers is perhaps the most promising solution to the conflicting data: “Modernity does not necessarily produce secularity. It necessarily produces pluralism, by which I mean the coexistence in the same society of different worldviews and value systems  (Berger quoted in Thuswaldner, 2014). In other words, in modern societies there is neither a steady one-way process of secularization nor a religious revitalization, but a growing diversity of belief systems and practices. 
 Religious Diversity 
 The practice of religion in Canada is ever changing and has recently become increasingly diverse. Religious diversity can be defined as a condition in which a multiplicity of religions and faiths co-exist in a given society (Robinson, 2003). Because of religious diversity, many speculate that Canada is turning into a Post-Christian society, in the sense that Christianity has increasingly become just one among many religious beliefs, including the beliefs of a large number of people who claim no religion. For those who report having a Christian heritage, only a minority can articulate the basic elements of Christian doctrine or read the bible on a regular basis. To an ever greater extent, Christianity no longer provides the basic moral foundation for Canadian values and practices. Canada appears to moving towards a much more religiously plural society. This is not without its problems however. 
 Religious diversity in Canada has accelerated in the last twenty years due to globalization and immigration. Until 1951, Canada was overwhelmingly a Christian nation with about 96 percent of the population a member of either a Protestant denomination (50%) or Catholic (46%) (Statistics Canada, 2001). There were only a handful of members from the other main world religions. Other religions during this time such as Muslims, Jews, Buddhists and Hindus only made up a negligible percentage of the population. With the opening up of immigration to non-Europeans in the 1960s, this began to change. 
 In the 21st century, religion in Canada has become increasingly diverse. Including the various Protestant denominations Statistics Canada surveyed 80 different religious groups in Canada in 2011 (Statistics Canada, 2011). Those who identified as Christian had gone down by nearly 22 percent since the 1970’s from 88% to 66% or two-thirds of the population. The percentage of other religions like Islam, Hinduism, Sikhism, Buddhism, Judaism and Eastern Orthodox Christianity increased from 4% to 11% of the population (Pew Research Center, 2013). 
 Religious diversity does not only include the increased number of people who participate in non-Christian religions. Instead, the group that identifies themselves as religious “nones  has become increasingly significant in society. A religious none refers to a person who chooses the category “none  on surveys about religious affiliation. They consist of atheists, agnostics, and people who simply say they subscribe to no religion in particular (Statistics Canada, 2011). It was not until the 1980’s that the group of religious nones became prevalent. During its first appearance, approximately four percent of the population in Canada identified as religiously unaffiliated. By 2011, that number had increased nearly a quarter, rising to about 24 percent (Pew Research Center, 2013). 
 Canadians have had varying responses to religious diversity. On an individual level, while many accept religious beliefs other than their own, others do not. Individuals are either open to embracing these differences or intolerant of the varying viewpoints surrounding them. Wuthnow (2005) describes three types of individual response to religious diversity. Firstly there are those who fully embrace the religious practices of others, to the point of creating hybrid beliefs and practices. Christians might practice yoga or Eastern meditation techniques, for example. Secondly, there are those who tolerate other religions or accept the value of other religious beliefs while maintaining religious distinctions intact. Finally, there are those who reject the value of other religious beliefs or feel that other religions are a threat to the integrity of “Christian  society. This can manifest in the range of negative individual responses to Muslim women who wear a hijab or headscarf for example. 
 On a societal level, there are three main types of social response to religious diversity: exclusion, assimilation and pluralism. Exclusion occurs when the majority population does not accept varying or non-traditional beliefs, and therefore believe that other religions should be denied entry into their society. The exclusionary response tends to happen when a society that identifies with a previously homogeneous faith community is confronted with the spread of religious diversity. Some of the early religious diversity in Canada was a product of faith groups like the Hutterites and Doukhobor’s immigrating to Canada after being excluded and persecuted in Russia, Europe and the United States on the basis of their beliefs. On the other hand, the Canadian policy towards Jews was exclusionary until relatively recently. Universities like McGill and the University of Toronto had quota systems that restricted the number of Jewish students until the 1960s. Jewish refugees fleeing Nazi Germany in the 1930s were brutally turned away by Canadian officials. Today issues of Islamophobia, “fear, hatred or prejudice against Islam and Muslims,  have been prevalent since the threat of jihadi terrorism became a widespread concern in Canada (International Civil Liberties Alliance, 2013). 
 A step beyond exclusion is assimilation. Assimilation occurs when people of all faiths are welcomed into the majority culture, but on the condition that they leave their beliefs behind and adopt the majority’s faith as their own. An example of assimilation in Canada is the history of Aboriginal spiritual practices like the sun dance, spirit dance and sweat lodge ceremonies. Between 1880 and mid-20th century these practices were outlawed and suppressed by both the Canadian state and Church organizations. They were seen as counter to the project of assimilating First Nations people into Christian European society and a settled, agricultural way of life (Waldram, Herring and Young, 2006). In 1885 and 1906, first a pass system and then an outright ban on leaving reserves were imposed on Plains Indian people to prevent them from congregating for Sun Dances, where they sought to honour the Great Spirit and renew their communities. The man who was eventually the deputy superintendent of Indian Affairs in Ottawa, Duncan Campbell Scott, wrote that the sun dances “cause waste of time, interfere with the occupations of the Indians, unsettle them for serious work, injure their health [and] encourage them in sloth and idleness… they should not be allowed to dissipate their energies and abandon themselves to demoralizing amusements  (Scott quoted in Waldram et al., 2006). 
 The most accommodating response to religious diversity is pluralism. Pluralism is the idea that every religious practice is welcome in a society regardless of how divergent its beliefs or social norms are. This response leads to a society in which religious diversity is fully accepted (Berry, 1974). Today pluralism is the official response to religious diversity in Canada and has been institutionalized through the establishment of Multicultural policy and the constitutional protections of religious freedoms. However, some thorny issues remain when the values of different religious groups clash with each other or with the secular laws of the criminal code. The right to follow Sharia law for Muslims, the right to have several wives for Mormons, the right to carry ceremonial daggers to school for Sikhs, the right to refuse to marry homosexual couples for Christian Fundamentalists, are all issues that pit fundamental religious freedoms against a unified sovereign law that applies to all equally. The acceptance of religious diversity in the pluralistic model is not without its problems. 
 For example, one pluralistic strategy for managing the diversity of beliefs has been to regard religious practice as a purely private matter. In order to avoid privileging one religious belief system over another in the public sphere, (e.g., in government agencies or public schools), governments have attempted to equally ban all religious expressions in public spaces. From the relatively trivial use of the term “holiday season  to replace “Christmas  in public schools to the more ambitious attempt to implement the Quebec Charter of Values, which would have banned the wearing of conspicuous religious symbols or face coverings for all public personnel in the Province of Quebec, the idea is to solve the problem of religious diversity by “privatizing  religious belief and practice. All religious faiths and practices are equal, included and accommodated as long as they remain private. However, people’s religious identities and commitments are often part of their public persona as well as their private and inform their political and social engagement in the public sphere. In the guise of implementing pluralism, the attempt to secularize the public sphere artificially restricts it (Connelly, 1999). 
 Religious freedom and diversity keeps the religious life of Canadians interesting. The full acceptance of religious differences may take some time, however studies show that Canadians are moving in this direction. The evidence is that as people become more exposed to religious diversity and interact with people of other religions more frequently, they become more accepting of beliefs and practices that diverge from their own (Dawson and Thiessen, 2014). 
 Making Connections: Sociology in the Real World 
 Muslim Women – The Niqab, Hijab and Burka 
 Table 15.3. What style of dress is appropriate for women? The results of the Middle Eastern Values Study, University of Michigan Population Studies Center, 2013. (Image courtesy of Pew Research Center) 
 While veiling continues to be practiced by Muslim women, and is more often associated with Islam than with other religious traditions, the practice of veiling has been integral to all three monotheistic religions (Judaism, Christianity and Islam). Christian and Jewish women wear headscarves as a cultural practice or commitment to modesty or piety, particularly in religious sects and cultural traditions like the Amish or Hutterites for example. 
 The word hijab is the Arabic word for a “screen  or “cover . Today, we know the hijab to be worn as a headscarf covering the whole head and neck, while leaving the face uncovered. The niqab is a veil for the face that leaves the area around the eyes clear and is worn accompanying the hijab. The burka is a one-piece loose fitting garment that covers the head, the face and entire body, leaving a mesh screen to see through. 
 There is a popular belief among Muslims and non-Muslims alike that Islam dictates veiling upon Muslim women. Furthermore, there is a parallel belief among both Muslims and non-Muslims that the prescription of veiling is stated clearly in the Koran, the Holy Book of Islam. As to the question of whether or not it is obligatory for women to wear hijab, the Koran states that women should cover their bosoms and wear long clothing, but does not specifically say that they need to cover their faces or hair (Koran, 24:31). The best dress according to the Koran is the garment of righteousness, which is not a garment in a literal sense, but a commitment to live in a manner that pleases God: “O children of Adam, we have provided you with garments to cover your bodies, as well as for luxury. But the best garment is the garment of righteousness. These are some of God’s signs, that they may take heed  (Koran, 7:26). The hijab as we know it today, is not mentioned specifically in the Koran. The prophet Mohammed was once asked by a woman if it was okay for women to go to prayers without their veils. His reply to her was, “She should cover herself with the veil of her companion and should participate in the good deeds and in the religious gathering of the Muslims.  
 Critics of the veiling tradition argue that women do not wear the veil by choice, but are forced to cover their heads and bodies. The veil represents a larger, patriarchal gendered division of privileges and freedoms that severely restrict women’s choices and movements while liberating men’s. The tradition of “purdah  in the Pushtun areas of Afghanistan for example requires women to be either secluded within the home or veiled when in public in order to protect the family’s honour (Moghadam, 1992). Purdah is part of the Pushtunwali or customary law in which women are regarded as the property of men. Similar arguments can be made for the wearing of the veil in Saudi Arabia and Iran, where Islamist governments impose a dress code and restrictions on women’s movements by law. It is significant that following the Iranian revolution in 1979 and the seizing of power in Afghanistan by the Taliban in 1996, the new Islamist governments forced unveiled women to wear the hijab (in Iran) and the burqa (in Afghanistan) as one of the first policies enacted to signal the Islamization of cultural practices. Raheel Raza (2015), president of the Council for Muslims Facing Tomorrow, argues that as such “the niqab and burka have nothing to do with Islam. They’re the political flags of the Muslim Brotherhood, ISIS, the Taliban, al-Qaida and Saudi Arabia. “The salience of this criticism may be due to the significant influence the media has on the western world in particular. 
 Muslim women who choose to wear coverings are seen as oppressed and without a voice. However, Muslim women choose to wear the hijab or other coverings for a variety of reasons. Many daughters of Muslim immigrants in the West contend that they choose to wear the veil as a symbol of devotion, piety, religious identity and self-expression. (Zayzafoon, 2005). Through their interpretation of the Koran, they believe that God has instructed them to do so as a means of fulfilling His commandment for modesty, while others wear it as a fashion statement. Furthermore, studies have shown that for some women, the hijab raises self-esteem and is used as form of autonomy. Some Muslim women do not perceive the hijab to be obligatory to their faith, while others wear the hijab as a means of visibly expressing their Muslim identity. 
 Particularly since 9/11, the hijab is perceived to be synonymous with Islam. Unfortunately this association has also occasionally resulted in the violent assaults of Muslim women wearing hijab. By making assumptions about the reasons women have for veiling, the freedom of these women to wear what they feel is appropriate and comfortable is taken away. 
 Most people view the hijab as cultural or religious, but for some, it carries political overtones. Muslim women who wear the hijab to communicate their political and social alliance with their birth country do so by challenging the prejudices of the Western world. (Zayzafoon, 2005). Wearing hijab is also used as a tool to protest Western feminist movements which present hijab-wearing women as oppressed or silenced. Although the principles of modesty are distinctly outlined in the Koran, some Muslim women perceive the wearing of the headscarf as a cultural interpretation of these scriptures, and choose to shift their focus internally to build a deeper spiritual relationship with God. While wearing hijab granted women in the past to engage outside the home without bringing attention to them, the headscarf in modern Western society has an adverse effect by attracting more attention to them which ultimately contradicts the hijabs original purpose. Overall, most Muslim women agree that it is a woman’s choice whether or not she wears the hijab. 
 New Religious Movements and Trends 
 Despite the assumptions of secularization theory and some of the early classical sociologists that religion is a static phenomenon associated with fixed or traditional beliefs and lifestyles, it is clear that the relationship of believers to their religions does change through time. We discussed the emergence of the New Religious Movements or cults above for example. Especially in the 1960s and 1970s, cults represented particularly intense forms of religious experimentation that spoke to widespread feelings of dissatisfaction with materialism, militarism and conventional religiosity. They were essentially new religious social forms. Below we will examine the rise of fundamentalism as another new religious social form that responds to issues of globalization and social diversity. Here we will broaden the concept of “new religious movements  beyond the cult phenomenon to discuss what exactly has been “in movement  in the relationship of believers to their religions in contemporary society. 
 Sociologists note that the decline in conventional religious observance in Canada, Europe and elsewhere has not necessarily entailed a loss of religious or spiritual practices and beliefs per se (Dawson and Thiessen, 2014). One aspect of this phenomenon has been the development of a new religious sensibility, which Grace Davie (1994) referred to as “believing without belonging.  People, especially young people, often say that they are ‘not religious, but they are spiritual.’ What does this mean for contemporary religious belief and practice? Firstly, surveys show that people retain fairly high levels of belief in God or supernatural forces, or belief in the efficacy of prayer or other ritual practices, even though they might never attend conventional churches or services. Secondly, the orientation to these beliefs and practices has also changed. People are seeking more holistic, flexible, ‘spiritual growth’ oriented types of religious experience (Beckford, 1992). New Age spirituality — the various forms and practices of spiritual inner-exploration that draw on non-Western traditions (e.g., Buddhism, Hinduism, Indigenous spirituality) or esoteric Western traditions (e.g., witchcraft, Gnosticism) — is emblematic of this new religious sensibility but it also increasingly characterizes people with otherwise conventional religious affiliations. 
 Dawson (1998) has characterized this new religious sensibility in terms of six key characteristics: 
 Individualistic: unlike conventional religious beliefs and moral codes which focus on transcendent or external spiritual beings, in the new religious sensibility the locus of the sacred is found within. The goal of religious practice is therefore not to conform to externally imposed codes of behaviour but to express the inner authenticity of personal identity. 
 Experiential: rather than focusing on formal religious beliefs, doctrines and ritual practices, the emphasis is on attaining direct spiritual experiences through practices of spiritual transformation such as meditation or yoga. 
 Pragmatic: the approach to religious authority is not one of submission but of pragmatic evaluation of the authority’s ability to facilitate spiritual transformation 
 Relativistic: rather than exclusive adherence to a particular doctrine or tradition, the attitude is one of tolerance and acceptance towards other religious perspectives, even to the point of syncretistically borrowing and blending the appealing elements of a variety of different traditions. 
 Holistic: unlike the dualisms of conventional religious belief (God/human, spirit/body, good/evil, human/nature, etc.), the emphasis is on the holistic interconnectness of all things. 
 Organizationally open and flexible: instead of the traditional commitments to a religious organization or faith, there is a tendency to model the interaction in the form of clients seeking and receiving services in order to maximize individual choice in how the spirtitual practice is pursued. 
 What this appears to suggest is that a significant number of people in contemporary society retain an interest in or “need  for what religions provide, but seek it through individualistic, non-dogmatic, non-institutional frameworks of spiritual practice. This has lead to increasingly individual, subjective, and private forms of religiosity, which conform to the dominant emphasis on the autonomy of the individual in late modern society (Hervieu-Léger, 2006). Religious practices are not only subject to a kind of “do-it-yourself  bricolage, assembled from a multiplicity of religious “symbolic stocks  that are now accessible through globalized media and interaction, but if they do not bring tangible, immediate benefits to individuals they are quickly abandoned. At the same time, the basic questions of fate, suffering, illness, transformation and meaning have not been satisfactorily answered by science or other secular institutions, which creates a continued demand for religious or spiritual solutions. 
 Making Connections: Case Study 
 Is Rastafarianism a Religion? 
 Most Canadians, if asked what a Rastafarian (“Rasta ) is, will answer that it is a person who lives in the Caribbean, wears clothing in green, red and gold, has dreadlocks in their hair, listens to reggae music and smokes a lot of cannabis. With the above stereotypes, it is easy to overlook the beliefs, rituals, and origins of Rastafarianism as a religion. Through the popularization of reggae music and artists like Bob Marley, the style of Rastafarianism has globalized though many do not know there is more to the movement than the outward appearance of its members. Today, most followers of Rastafarianism are in Jamaica, although smaller populations can be found in several countries including Canada, Great Britain, South Africa, Ethiopia and Israel. 
 Rastafarianism developed during the 1920’s when the political founder of the movement, Marcus Garvey, urged Jamaicans to look to Africa for the return of a Black King and new spiritual leader. He said that a King would soon be crowned to liberate black people from the oppression caused by slavery. On November 2nd 1930, soon after Garvey’s prophecy, ‘Ras Tafari Makonnen’ — the Emperor Haile Selassie I–was crowned as the emperor of Ethiopia (Stanton, Ramsamy, Seybolt, and Elliot; 2012). 
 This was an event with more than just political significance. Many black Jamaicans regarded the coronation of Ras Tafari Makonnen as the inauguration of a new era of spiritual redemption for dispossessed Africans after centuries of colonization, cruelty, oppression and slavery. The followers of Garvey, known as Rastas, believed the redemption of the black race would involve the fulfillment of biblical and secular prophesies concerning the imminent downfall of ‘Babylon,’ which was equated with the corrupt, colonial, slavery based world created by the “white man (Hedbige, 1997). With the fall of Babylon, Rastas believed there would be a reversal in slavery-based social hierarchy. Black people would then take their place as spiritual and political leaders the way God (Jah) intended them too. 
 One of the central religious beliefs of Rastafarians is that the Christian Bible describes the history of the African race (Waters, 1985). To Rastas, Ethiopia is the biblical promised land, the “City of David  referred to as Zion (2 Samuel, 5:7). In the prophecy of Zion, Rastas strive to return to Zion to leave the oppressive, exploitative, materialistic western world (of Babylon) where they will attain a life of heaven on earth, a place of unity, peace, and freedom. 
 However, like many of the spiritual movements of late modernity, Rastafarianism does not emphasize doctrine, church attendance, or being a member of a congregation. It focuses on the individual’s direct experience of God (Jah) as a “positive vibration  enabling him or her to live in harmony with nature (Bone, 2014). There are several key sacraments or religious rituals that Rasta practice to achieve this direct experience. Groundation Day is celebrated on April 21st to remember the day that Haile Selassie 1 (sacred Ethiopian emperor) visited Jamaica. On this day Rastafarians chant, pray, feast, and create music as celebration. The music (or Nyabingi) Rasta’s create that day combines traditional chanting and drumming to attain a higher spiritual consciousness. This is a similar to the music and meditation practices used to achieve higher states of consciousness and clarity during regular “reasoning sessions  in which Rastas gather for sessions of intense dialogue to discuss communal issues. Achieving higher consciousness through ritual means enables participants in reasoning sessions to re-evaluate their positions, overcome the confines of their false sense of self (or ego), and reach higher truths through consensus. 
 Smoking Cannabis (Ganja) also plays an important role in many Rastafarian rituals, although it is not mandatory. It is described as a “holy herb . Rastafarians cite biblical passages like Psalms 104:14 (“He causeth the grass for the cattle, and the herb for the services of man ) as reference for its sacramental value. Cannabis use is considered sacred and is usually accompanied with biblical study and meditation. The purpose of this sacrament is to cleanse the body and mind, heal the soul, bring a heightened consciousness, promote peacefulness and calm, and bring Rasta’s closer to Jah (Murrell et al, 1998). 
 The custom of wearing dreadlocks — long, uncombed locks of hair — also has religious significance to Rastafarians (Stanton, Ramsamy, Seybolt, and Elliot, 2012). Dreadlocks (dreads) have political significance as a protest against Babylon because they symbolize the natural, non-industrial lifestyle of the Rastas (Fisher, 1994). Dreadlocks also have several spiritual meanings. They conform to the style worn by traditional Ethiopian warriors and priests and thus represent the power of their African ancestors. They resemble a lion’s mane, again symbolizing Africa but also the biblical lion of the tribe of Judah and the messianic end of days when the lion will lie down with lambs (Stanton, Ramsamy, Seybolt, and Elliot, 2012). Rastafarians also point to the holy vows of consecration of the Nazarites of the Hebrew bible: “During the entire time of his dedication, he is not to allow a razor to pass over his head until the days of his holy consecration to The LORD have been fulfilled. He is to let the locks on his head grow long  (Numbers 6:5, International Standard Version). 
 From a sociological point of view, Rastafarianism has to be understood as a New Religious Movement (broadly defined) in the context of the social and racial conditions of Jamaica in the 20th century. It is significant that it blends spiritual motifs of dread and redemption from the Christian bible with the anti-colonial, anti-racist politics of Third World activists like Marcus Garvey. Contemporary Rastafarians typically come from disadvantaged backgrounds and until the rise of reggae music as a worldwide phenomenon the term “Rasta  was used as a term of contempt or insult (Hedbige, 1997). The belief system therefore provides a religious inflection to the material circumstances black Jamaicans face due to the history of colonial oppression. It is a claim to status as much as a path to spiritual transformation. Rastafarianism mobilizes black people to “free their minds from mental slavery,  resist the restrictions of social hierarchies, and step into their role as leaders like Haile Selassie I, the way God (Jah) intended them to. 
 15.4 Contemporary Fundamentalist Movements 
 During her walk to school, an eight year old girl, Naama Margolese, became the subject of the ignominious side of religious fundamentalism when she was spat on and called a “whore  by a group of Ultra-Orthodox Jewish Men in Beith Shemesh, Israel. This group of men wished to enforce their “strict interpretation of modesty rules  (Kershner, 2011) even though Margolese was wearing long sleeves and a skirt. Another extreme fundamentalist group, the Westboro Baptist Church, picket the funerals of fallen military personnel (Hurdle, 2007), of the victims of the Boston Marathon bombings (Linkins, 2013), and even of the brutal greyhound bus stabbing in Winnipeg, Canada (CBC News, 2008). They interpret these tragic events as demonstrations of God’s discontent and of society’s rejection of fundamentalist interpretations of gay marriage, divorce and abortion. The public demonstrations of the Ultra-Orthodox men and the Westboro Baptist Church provide a platform for these groups to disseminate their beliefs, mobilize supporters and recruit new followers. However, the controversial protests also attack routine norms of civility — the right of 8 year old girls to walk to school unmolested by adult men; the solemnity of funeral rites and the mourning processes of the bereaved — and lead to communal disruption and resentment, as well as the alienation of these groups from broader society. 
 One of the key emblems of the contemporary rise of religious fundamentalism is that conflicts, whether they are playground disagreements or extensive political confrontations, tend to become irreconcilable when fundamental beliefs are at the core of said disputes. These types of issue are one of the defining features of the contemporary era. Unlike discussions relating to secular business or political interests, fundamentalist beliefs associated with religious ideology seem non-negotiable and therefore prone to violent conflict. In an increasingly globalized and diverse world, where people are obliged to live in close proximity with “Others  who hold different truths, the militant insistence on ultimate religious truths seems problematic. 
 The rise of fundamentalism also poses problems for the sociology of religion. For many decades theorists such as Berger (1967), Wilson (1982; 1985) and Bruce (1999) argued that the modernization of societies, the privatization of religion, and the global spread of religious and cultural pluralism meant that societies would continue to secularize and levels of religiosity would steadily decline. However, other theorists such as Hadden (1987; 1989), Stark (1994; 1999) and Casanova (1994; 1999) have recently begun to reconsider the secularization thesis. They argue that religious diversity and pluralism have sparked new interpretations of religion and new revivals of religiosity. Dawson (2006) observes that the inability of late modern societies to produce concrete answers to basic questions about the existential experiences of human life or provide meaningful responses to miraculous or tragic events “has implicitly kept the door open to religious worldviews  (pp. 113-14). In other words, these new sociological interpretations of religion propose that rather than withering away, fundamentalist groups will continue to thrive because they offer individuals answers to ultimate questions and give meaning to a complicated world. 
 Interestingly enough, in his later works, Berger (1999) abandoned his original theory of secularization. Even though contemporary society is increasingly modern — globally linked, diverse, technologically sophisticated, capitalist — it is as “furiously religious as it ever was, and in some places more than ever  (1999). Berger gives the example of the “Islamic upsurge  as an “impressive revival of emphatically religious commitments  (1999 ) and presents the worldwide adoption of evangelicalism as “breathtaking in scope  (1999). The growth of evangelical Protestantism is noted to have gained a substantial numbers of converts all around the world, but most prominently in Latin America, which Berger identifies as having “between forty and fifty million Evangelical Protestants south of the U.S. border  (1999, p.8), many of which are assumed to be of first-generation. 
 The Pew Research Center has recently presented some interesting findings that can also provide a general sense of what the future for religious fundamentalism may hold. First, Pew (2015a) identifies that in the United States, one of the most modern societies in the world, “[s]ix-in-ten adults — and three-quarters of Christians — believe the Bible or other holy scripture is the word of God.  In addition to this “[r]oughly three-in-ten adults (31%) and four-in-ten Christians (39%) go a step further and say the Bible should be interpreted literally, word for word . Second, Pew (2015b) identified Islam as the fastest growing religion in the world, and suggested that by 2050 “the number of Muslims will nearly equal the number of Christians around the world . While it is not clear from this research how many Muslims hold fundamentalist beliefs per se (eg. Wahhabi, Salifi, etc.), this is of interest because the more or less equal distribution of the two most popular world religions could result in an intensification of fundamentalist support. In other words, the anxieties around the encounter with the beliefs of the “Other  that leads people to seek out the “certainties  of fundamentalist belief systems, are likely to intensify once Christianity’s spot as the world’s most popular religion is threatened. 
 Defining and Explaining Fundamentalism 
 How does the sociology of religion explain the rise of fundamentalist belief in an increasingly modern, global society then? The answer that sociologists have proposed is that fundamentalism and religious revivalism are modern. Rather than seeing it as a return to traditionalism, Ruthven (2005) defines fundamentalism as a modern religious movement that could only emerge under modern conditions: “a shrinking ‘globalized’ world where people of differing and competing faiths are having to live in close proximity with each other.  The encounter between faiths initiated by a globalized world provokes the fundamentalist reaction because, in the face of a bewildering diversity of ways to live, fundamentalism provides individuals with an opportunity to consolidate their identity around a core of “ultimate  beliefs which relieve anxiety and provide comfort and reassurance. In this way, Ruthven (2005) defines the common core of fundamentalism in different faith traditions as “a religious way of being that manifests itself in a strategy by which beleaguered believers attempt to preserve their distinctive identity as a people or a group in the face of modernity and secularization.  
 The use of the term “fundamentalism  has its origin in the early 20th century Christian Evangelical and Pentecostal movements in Southern California. Oil tycoons, Milton and Lyman Stewart, sponsored a series of widely distributed pamphlets titled The Fundamentals: A Testimony of Truth, which presented a core set of beliefs said to be fundamental to Christianity: 
 Biblical inerrancy: The inerrancy and infallibility of the Bible 
 Creationism: God’s direct creation of the world 
 Divine intervention: The existence of miracles 
 Divinity of Christ: The virgin birth of Jesus as the son of God 
 Redemption: The redemption of the sins of humanity through Jesus’ crucifixion and resurrection 
 Pre-millenarian dispensationalism: The Second Coming of Jesus, the end times, and the rapture 
 These pamphlets were not a return to pre-modern traditionalism however. They were an explicit response to modern forms of rationality, including the trend towards historical and scientific explanations of religious certainties. They also addressed the desire for clarity and simplification of religion in a complex “market  of diverse, competing religious doctrines and theologies. The Stewart’s pamphlets can be therefore be interpreted as both a response to, and the product of modernity. A response, because of their defensively orientated motivation to challenge the modernist movement; and a product, because of their use of modern techniques of mass communication and commercial promotion to transmit a particular set of beliefs in a clear and concise manner to a mass audience. 
 To expand the concept of fundamentalism beyond this specific usage in the context of 20th century Christian Protestantism poses some analytical problems. In a strict definition its use would be limited to this specific, early 20th century religious movement in the United States: “those who were prepared to do battle for The Fundamentals  (Ruthven, 2005). However its use in popular culture today has expanded far beyond this narrow reference. Fundamentalism not only refers to similar movements in other faiths like Islam, Judaism, Hinduism and Buddhism, but it is also common to hear the term applied to “market fundamentalism,  “secular fundamentalism,  or “musical fundamentalism,  etc. in non-religious contexts. It is even possible to describe New Age fundamentalisms, like est or the Landmark Forum, which promise to strip participants of their old and useless, counter-productive psychological defenses (or “rackets ) and return them to their core moral purpose: to “take responsibility  for themselves. 
 In this expanded usage, fundamentalism loosely refers to the return to a core set of indisputable and literal principles derived from ancient holy, or at least unchallengeable, texts. However, even if we restrict the use of the term fundamentalism to a religious context, there are a number of problems of application. For example, the emphasis on the literalism of holy texts would not be able to distinguish between fundamentalist Islamic movements and mainstream Islam, because both regard the Koran to be the literal, and therefore indisputable word of God communicated to the prophet Mohamed by the Arch Angel Gabriel. On the other hand, the fundamentalist movements of Hinduism do not have a single, authoritative, holy text like the Bible or Koran to take as the literal word of God or Brahman. 
 In response to these problems, Ruthven (2005) proposes a family resemblance definition (see Section 15.1 above) composed of a number of characteristics shared by most, but not all religious fundamentalisms: 
 A return to the roots or core of scripture: a common style of reading holy texts 
 The use of religious texts as blueprints for practical action rather than simply spiritual or moral inspiration 
 A search for secure foundations of personal identity and cultural authenticity in a modern pluralistic world 
 A rejection of cultural pluralism and diversity in favour of religious monoculture 
 The projection of period of ignorance prior to the revelation of belief and the myth of a Golden Age when norms of religious tradition held sway 
 A theocratic ideal of a political order ruled by God 
 A belief in Messianism or end times when the divine will return to Earth 
 A reaffirmation of traditional, patriarchal principles including the subordination of women and strict, separate gender roles 
 In this respect, the common sociological feature that unites various religious fundamentalisms, is their very modern reinvention of traditions in response to the complexity of social change brought about by globalization and the diversification of human populations. Globalization and late modernity introduce an anxiety-laden, plurality of life choices (including religious choices) where none existed before. As Ruthven (2005) puts it, “fundamentalism is one response to the crisis of faith brought on by awareness of differences.  It seeks to secure the certainty of individual or collective selfhoods by defining their roots in an all-encompassing, unquestioned, supernatural source of “ultimate referentiality  as Peter Berger described (see Section 15.2 above). 
 Fundamentalism and Women 
 If religious fundamentalist movements primarily serve and protect the interests and rights of men, why do women continue to support and practice these religions in larger numbers than men? This is a difficult question that has not been satisfactorily answered. In the feminist view, women’s subordinate role with respect to the leadership roles of men in religion is a manifestation of patriarchy. Women’s place in these movements subjects them to oppressive religious social norms and prevents them from achieving social mobility or personal success. On the other hand, the traditional gender roles promoted by fundamentalist movements are seen by some women to provide a welcome clarity about men’s and women’s roles and responsibilities in the family and elsewhere in a period of late modernity when gender roles appear increasingly diverse and uncertain (Woodhead, 2007). From another angle, Mahmood (2005) has argued on the basis of her ethnographic research into the Da’wa or “Mosque Movement  among Egyptian Muslim women, that from the women’s point of view, leading chaste, pious, disciplined lives of ritual practice apart from men and secular life is a form of spiritual exercise that actually empowers them and gives them strength. Strict observance of the rules of ritual observance is choice women make to bring themselves closer to God. 
 Control over female sexuality is a primary focus of all fundamentalist movements. Through fundamentalist religious beliefs, men are “reclaiming the family as a site of male power and dominance  in the face of modern challenges to male privilege and confining gender roles (Butler, 1998). For example, in Islamic fundamentalism, it is seen as shameful and dishonourable for women to expose their bodies. Under the Pushtunwali (customary law), Afghan women are regarded as the property of men and the practice of Purdah (seclusion within the home and veiling when in public) is required to protect the honour of the male lineage (Moghadam, 1992). In both Islamic and Hindu fundamentalism, women’s equality rights are stripped from them through laws and regulation. For example, in 1986, the Indian parliament passed a bill that would disallow women to file for divorce . There have also been many significant instances of violence against women (physical and sexual) perpetrated by men in order to maintain their social dominance and control (Chhachhi, 1989). In Saudi Arabia, rape can only be proven in court if the perpetrator confesses or four witnesses provide testimony (Doumato, 2010). Christian fundamentalists in the United States have pressed for decades for the reversal of the 1973 Wade-vs.-Roe decision that guaranteed women’s reproductive rights and were partially successful in achieving their goal with George Bush’s signing of the “partial-birth abortion  law in 2003 (Kaplan, 2005). 
 One purpose of fundamentalist movements therefore is to advantage men and reinforce ideals of patriarchal power in a modern context in which women have successfully struggled to gain political, economic and legal powers historically denied them. The movements’ efforts to shape gender relations through enacting new social and political limitations on women leads Riesebrodt (1993) to define fundamentalism as a “patriarchal protest movement.  What is necessary to keep in mind however, especially with respect to the controversies of fundamentalist Islamic or Hindu religions, is that it can also become an oppressive act for Westerners to attempt to speak on behalf of non-Western women. The role of women in Muslim or Hindu traditions is so different from that in Western religions and culture that characterizing it as inferior or subservient in Western terms risks distorting the actual experience or the nature of the role within the actual fabric of life in these traditions (Moaddel, 1998). In order to properly study women in Fundamentalist movements, it is imperative to gather the perspectives and ideas of the women in the movements themselves in order to eradicate the Orientalist stigma and bias towards non-Western religions and cultures. 
 The Veil and the Iranian Revolution 
 After the 1979 Revolution in Iran, the law making veiling mandatory for all women emerged as one of the most important symbols of the new, collective Iranian national and religious identity. It was a means of demonstrating resistance against Western values and served symbolically to mark a difference from the pre-revolutionary program of modernization that had been instituted by the deposed Shah. Many women demonstrated against this law and against other legal discrimination against women in the new post-revolutionary juridical system. However, this dissent did not last long. As Patricia Higgins (1985) stresses, these demonstrations were not supported by the majority of Iranian women. The number of supporters of the demonstrations also decreased when Ayatollah Khomeini–the religious leader of Islamic revolution — mentioned his support of compulsory veiling for women. So it appears that the majority of Iranian women accepted the new rules or at least did not oppose them. 
 In order to explain the main reasons why the majority of Iranian women accepted compulsory veiling after the revolution, it is important to distinguish between women’s “rights and duties  and their actual behaviour patterns (Higgins, 1985). In the prerevolutionary regime of the Shah, there had been a state-lead attempt to change the juridical system and the public sphere to promote the rights of Iranian women in a manner similar to their western peers. Nevertheless, the majority of Iranian women, especially in the rural areas and margins of the cities, still wore their traditional and religious clothing. Veiling was part of the traditional or customary dress of Iranian women. It was only when the veil was used as a political symbol that it was transformed from a traditional element of women’s fashion into a political sign of resistance against western values, emblematic of the ideology of the main Islamic parties. 
 However, an equally important fact, which is always less stressed in the dominant narrative about the Iranian revolution is that this transformation of veiling from traditional custom to political symbol first occurred in 1930s, when King Reza Pahlavi banned veiling for all women in the public sphere. To be clear, veiling was a custom or fashion in clothing for women, but not mandatory in law. Nevertheless, 40 years before the 1979 revolution, King Reza Pahlavi made unveiling mandatory in law for all women in Iran. What were the main reasons beneath this radical change which was imposed on Iranian society by the King Reza government? 
 Reza Pahlavi can be recognized as the founder of new modern state in Iran. Just as his peer in Turkey, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, he wished to rapidly transform Iranian society from a traditional, religious society into a modern, coherent nation state. To a certain extent he was successful, especially in building the main transportation and new economic and bureaucratic structure. In this vein, the veiling of women was recognized as one of the most important symbols of Iranian traditional culture which needed to be removed, even violently, if modernization was to succeed. But did the significance of veiling arise from its place in religious texts and the strict customs of traditional ways of life or did it arise only as the outcome of the modern reading of these religious and traditional rules? 
 It has been argued that fundamentalist movements represent a claim for recognition by beleaguered religious communities. They are a means by which traditional ways of life become aware of themselves as “different  and therefore threatened (Ruthven, 2005). However, in the case of the Hijab or veiling in contemporary Iran, the irony is that from the beginning it was not the religious scholars, traditional leaders or Olama who emphasized veiling as central to the distinction between traditional, religious Iranian culture and western culture. Rather, the equation of traditional Iranian religious society and veiling originated with secular intellectuals and politicians. As Chehabi (1993) states, “When upper-class Iranian men began traveling to Europe in larger numbers in the nineteenth century, they felt self-conscious about their looks and gradually adopted European clothing. Upon their return to Iran, many maintained their European habits, which had come to symbolize progress  (italics added). Reza Shah, the modern leader who identified these symbolic qualities of religious identity, could never be regarded as a religious fundamentalist. However, he was the first head of state to recognize and highlight veiling as an important symbol of the traditional religious way of life, albeit in a negative way. It was Reza Shah who initiated the project to rid Iranian society of fanaticism and ‘backward’ cultural traditions by banning veiling for women. 
 The second irony is that, apart from upper middle class urban women who embraced the active role of unveiled women in the public sphere, this process of cultural modernization and unveiling was not noticeably successful. The majority of Iranian women were subject to traditional and religious restrictions whose authority rested with the family and religious leaders, not state laws (Higgins, 1985: 490). However, during the Iranian revolution, the political process of Islamization was not monolithically conservative or fundamentalist. At the moment of revolution the dominant Islamic discourse included accepting and internalizing some parts of modern and western identity, while criticizing other parts. It was argued that veiled woman should participate in society equally, even if motherhood should be their priority. At this point in time, veiling was not seen so much as a return to traditional conservative gender roles, but as a means of neutralizing sexual differences in the public sphere. If they complied with wearing the veil, (as noted above, most Iranian women already did wear veils voluntarily), women could leave their confinement within the patriarchal family and participate in public social activities, even without permission of their father or husband. Veiling was ironically a means of women’s liberation. 
 In this context, during and after the revolution, the leader Ayatollah Khomeini frequently asked women to participate in demonstrations against the Shah’s monarchy even without the permission of their family. At this specific historical moment, the religious authorities treated women as free, independent individuals, whereas previously they had been under the strict authority of their families. Veiling, within the political narrative of the revolution, was seen as the feminine expression of the resurgence of pure Islam, a flag of the critique of western values by Iranian society. After the revolution consolidated into the Iranian Islamic state, this modern, leftist version of Islam was displaced by a more fundamentalist conservative narrative. Even so, at its inception the meaning of compulsory veiling, as a symbol of traditional religious values, was not the product of the traditional values of religious society itself but a product of the way religious society was represented by secular scholars and politicians. Modern secularization was the process that established the symbolic significance of the veil for fundamentalism in Iran. 
 Making Connections: Social Policy and Debate 
 The Case of Sati 
 One of the most internationally publicized and controversial instances of sati was that of Roop Kanwar on September 4, 1987. It occurred in the small town of Deorala in the state of Rajasthan. Roop Kanwar was a well-educated eighteen year old Rajput woman who had married twenty-four year old Mal Singh just eight months before. Her husband died unexpectedly of gastroenteritis, although some speculate it was actually a suicide by poisoning (Hawley, 1994a). The next day, Roop Kanwar stepped onto the funeral pyre with her deceased husband, put his head in her hands as is the custom, and burned alive with his body. This illegal event was witnessed by a few hundred people but there were conflicting reports as to what had actually happened. Pro-sati supporters said that Roop Kanwar had voluntarily decided to become sati and underwent the process with purpose and calm. Those who opposed sati argued that she had not acted of her own free will and was instead drugged into submission by her in-laws who had economic motives for her death. Some reported that she had tried to jump off the pyre, but was pushed back onto it (Hawley, 1994b). 
 The practice of Sati offers another look at the complicated relationship between fundamentalism and women. Sati is a Hindu ritual in which a widow sacrifices herself by being burned alive on the funeral pyre of her deceased husband. It is a religious funeral rite practiced or endorsed primarily by Hindu groups rooted in the aristocratic Rajput caste in the Rajasthan state of India. Sati is therefore not central to Hinduism, but is practiced by a portion of the population, both men and women, who can be seen as Hindu fundamentalists. While the Western and English understanding of the word sati is as the practice of widow burning, in the Hindi language it refers to the woman herself. A woman who is sati is a good, virtuous woman who is devoted to her husband (Hawley, 1994a). The Rajput belief is that a woman who freely chooses to become sati is protecting her husband in his journey after death. The power of her self-sacrifice cancels out any bad karma that he may have accrued during his lifetime. She also provides blessings to all those who witness the event (Hawley, 1994b). 
 The term “sati  comes from the Hindu myth of the goddess Sati who was the wife of the deity Shiva. After her father humiliates Shiva by excluding him from a sacrifice, Sati kills herself in front of him as an act loyalty to her husband. Supporters see the modern version of sati as a manifestation of this same sacrificial power used by the goddess Sati (Hawley, 1994a). However, while sati is seen as a traditional practice, most of the early Hindu religious texts do not recognize sati at all, and it is only mentioned occasionally in later texts. In a manner consistent with other forms of fundamentalism, certain verses have been cited as scriptural justification of the practice by supporters, but their interpretation and translation have been contested by scholars and there is no definitive, unambiguous endorsement of sati (Yang, 1989). 
 Although this Hindu practice has never been widespread, it happened with enough frequency to catch the attention and revulsion of the British in the nineteenth century while India was under British rule. In 1829 British officials made the practice illegal and a punishable offence for anyone involved (Yang, 1989). The practice has continued to occur very infrequently since then, but the worship and glorification of sati is still a major aspect of the religious belief system of some Rajput Hindus (Harlan, 1994). The criminalization of sati has also become a rallying point for Hindu fundamentalists in their larger battle against the secular state. Its persecution is seen as an infringement by the state into the domain of religion causing the fight for sati to become a fight for religious freedom (Hawley, 1994a). 
 While previous instances of sati went relatively unnoticed outside the local area, the rise of women’s rights activism by feminists and other liberals caused the story of Roop Kanwar to gain major attention. Twelve days after her death by immolation, a chunari celebration was held at the funeral site to honor and praise her sacrifice. Although the Rajasthan High Court legally prohibited this gathering and any other “glorification of sati  after pressure from women’s rights groups, between 200,000 to 300,000 people from throughout the province attended (Hawley, 1994a). Further gatherings and sati endorsement by both religious and political organizations continued in the months that followed and eclipsed smaller protests held by opponents of sati. 
 The sati of Roop Kanwar triggered a number of larger social debates regarding the intertwining threads of religion, gender, and the state. Some Indian feminists saw sati as a “ritualized instance of violence against women  and paralleled it with female infanticides and dowry deaths also practiced in India (Hawley, 1994b). For them, the religious significance given to sati is nothing more than a guise to aid the oppression of women. Meanwhile supporters said that sati is a deeply spiritual event where the power of a women’s self-sacrifice and devotion to her husband causes the woman to become “a manifestation of divinity  (Hawley, 1994b). Roop Kanwar’s case questioned whether sati is truly a voluntary undertaking, or if it is decided by family members for religious or economic motives. Sati also became a battleground in the struggle between the religious freedom of Hindus and the secular Indian State. Conservative Hindu organizations said that the state had “no business interfering in matters of religion  (Hawley, 1994b) and that by criminalizing sati their religion was being unfairly targeted. 
 The pro-sati movement that followed Roop Kanwar’s sati has a number of features which are characteristic of fundamentalism and it is this event that first led to wide usage of the term “Hindu fundamentalism  (Hawley, 1994b). First is the reactionary nature of this Hindu movement against the perceived threat to traditional religious beliefs and values. Demonstrations by sati supporters signified a resistance to the modernization, secularization, and liberalization of India, particularly in regards to the place of women. The sati debate manifested into a war between traditional, patriarchal beliefs and liberal feminist ideas about women’s rights. The denouncement of sati was seen by fundamentalists as a “condemnation of chastity and virtue  and feminists were portrayed as modern, westernized women condoning loose morality (Narasimhan, 1992). Sati also reinforces another commonality among fundamentalist religions: the notion that a woman’s principle place and religious duty is to serve her husband and her family. By becoming sati, a woman is performing the ultimate act of devotion to her husband and is sacrificing herself for the betterment of her family and the wider community. In other words, a woman’s power is gained through her service to others, and more specifically to men. (Hawley, 1994b). While sati has become a very rare occurrence in modern times, the debate it has caused between conservative Hindu beliefs and liberal or secular thoughts on women’s rights is representative of the larger picture of religion in India, and arguably of the relationship between fundamentalism and women in all societies. 
 Science and Faith 
 For most of history every aspect of life in society revolved around some form of religious practice. In many cultures, prior to contact with the Western world, religion was so ingrained into every part of life that there was no specific word for it. Religion in ancient times can be thought of as having a similar role to that of contemporary laws (Müller, 1873). It was the means by which life was regulated and made purposeful. The modern shift towards secularization and the scientific worldview is a recent phenomenon. 
 As we saw earlier in the chapter, Weber (1919/1958) characterized the transition to a secular, rationalized, scientific worldview as the disenchantment of the world. Explanations for events of everyday life were no longer based on the notion of mysterious or supernatural powers. Everything, in principle, could be reduced to calculation. However, the transition from a world based on religion to one that gives the ultimate authority to scientific discovery has not been without its issues. Contemporary creationists reject Darwinian evolutionary theory because they believe everything came into being as a result of divine creation, as described by religious texts such as the Bible. Similarly, many Christian fundamentalists continue to deny that climate change is a real threat to our planet, because recognizing climate change as a problem, and taking preventative action, would be to question God’s plan and ultimate authority. 
 One historic example of such a conflict is that between the astronomer Copernicus and the Catholic Church (Russel, 1989). When Copernicus proposed a heliocentric model of the solar system based on his empirical astronomic observations, (i.e. in which the sun is the immobile center), he opposed the Earth-centric model of Ptolemy endorsed by the Church. This claim, originally made in 1543, did not immediately attract the attention of the Church. However, almost a century later, in 1610, when Galileo confirmed its validity based on evidence he had collected using a telescope, he was tried for heresy. Because his model was in direct contradiction with Holy Scripture he was forced to denounce his support of heliocentric theory. He lived out the rest of his life under house arrest, although the ideas he championed were later proven to be scientifically correct. 
 What is the underlying source of the conflict between science and religion and what are the implications? Berman (1981) argues that the Scientific Revolution created a division between the worlds of fact and the worlds of value. This was the basis for a profound shift in worldview. Humans went from being part of a rich and meaningful natural order to being the alienated observers of a mechanistic and empty object-world. Questions concerning the value of things or why things were, which had been addressed by religion, were replaced with questions about what things are and how things work. Modes of knowledge that had been relied on to produce a sense of purpose and meaning for people for centuries were incapable of producing the new knowledge needed to effectively manipulate nature to satisfy human material needs (for food, shelter, health, profit, etc.) (Holtzman, 2003). 
 This shift to an empirical, objective, evidence based knowledge was democratic or “communalistic , in the sense that science is freely available, shared knowledge, open to public discussion and debate (recall the principles of CUDOS from Chapter 2). It was a threat to the hierarchical power of religion whose authority was based on its claim to have unique access to sacred truths. However, at the same time, Weber (1919(1958)) also argued that “science is meaningless because it gives no answer to our question, the only question important for us: ‘What shall we do and how shall we live?’  In fact, Weber predicted that the outcome of the disenchantment of the world and the dominance of the scientific worldview would be a condition of “ethical anarchy.  Science could answer practical questions of how to do things effectively or efficiently, but could not answer the “ultimate  human questions of value, purpose, and goals. These questions would be answered by other sources, but without any authoritative means of distinguishing which was correct. In particular, it is unlikely that those who practice different religions will come to answer the ultimate questions in the same way. To the question, “which of the warring gods should we serve?  Weber argued there could be no definitive or unifying answer. The different sets of values of modern society cannot be reconciled into a singular, cohesive system to guide society. 
 Nevertheless, while science and religion may differ at the most fundamental level, disagreement between the two is not as common as many may think. A recent study found that there was no difference in the likelihood of religious or non-religious people to seek out scientific knowledge, even though many Protestants and conservative Catholics will side with religious explanations when there is a conflict. The debates over evolution and the history of the universe are a case in point (Evans, 2011). What this suggests firstly is that conflicts do not arise because religion completely rejects everything scientific (or vice versa), but that conflict arises only if competing claims are made, (as seen in the case of Galileo above). It was not that the Church completely rejected everything scientific, but that Galileo’s claims were in direct contradiction of what was stated in the Holy Scripture. Secondly, conflicts arise when the morality of science is being questioned by religion. For example embryonic stem cell research is rejected by some religious leaders for moral reasons. For the most part, science is broadly accepted, as many religions adapt to the challenges of modernity. It is only in a few cases that there are major disputes between religion and science. 
 Creationism and Darwinian Evolutionary Theory 
 Creationism versus Darwin’s Evolutionary Theory remains one of the most hotly contested debates in the field of academia and religious studies. This debate pits American Protestant fundamentalists against the field of natural science (McCalla, 2007, p. 547). Specifically, this debate has caused extensive issues when it comes to education in the middle school and high school years, as creationists lobby for an education that does not acknowledge evolutionary theory (Bleifeld, 1983). After many decades of education taught from the perspective of the field of objective natural sciences, the recent rise of Protestant fundamentalism has lead to conflict over the lack of emphasis in schools on creationist theory. The debate however involves people from both sides arguing at cross-purposes over very different things. It is therefore necessary to clarify the beliefs and arguments stemming from both creationists and evolutionary theorists. 
 The debate between creationism and Darwin’s evolutionary theory can be explained simply. Charles Darwin proposed that the complex nature of life on earth could be explained by genetic mutations and small changes that over time, that, due to their effect on the capacities of species survive and compete for limited resources, resulted in a process of “natural selection.  On this basis, Darwin proposed that humans were also essentially biological animals who had formed through an evolutionary process over millennia from primitive primate ancestors to contemporary Homo sapiens. This is Darwinian evolutionary theory. Scientists and advocates of Darwin’s evolutionary theory posit, based on evidence of fossil morphology, carbon dating and genetics, that the world as we know it today and the inhabitants of earth have come to be as they are through a long history of evolution, forming from primitive beings, into more complex organisms through a mechanism of survival of the fittest (Wilson, 2002). 
 This presented a cosmology that certain Christian sects found to be fundamentally at odds with the notion of human divinity found in the bible. The idea that humans were “apes  seemed to directly contradict the idea that they were created “in the image of God  (Genesis 1:27). As a result creationism began to gain momentum in the 19th century as a struggle against new science-based evidence of evolutionary theories. It found its support in the turn to literal or inerrant readings of the bible. The Protestant fundamentalists argued that to be Christian, everything in the Bible had to be held as completely true in a factual sense. Evolutionary theory therefore caused problems for many Christians because in the Bible the narratives in Genesis highlighted that God created the universe in 6 days and that later the Great Flood destroyed all life except for the occupants of the Ark (McCalla, 2007, p.548). Evolution contradicted the creation story, “the notion that the world was created by God ex nihilo, from nothing  (Ayala, 2006, p. 71). The earth and everything in it was created by God as is, not through a process of evolution, and to dispute this goes against everything the Bible stands for (Ayala, 2006). This fundamental difference in cosmology has pitted creationists and evolutionists against one another. 
 The context of the turn to biblical inerrancy was not evolutionary theory however, but the challenge of the “higher criticism  of the Bible developed by German theologians and scholars in the early 19th century. Biblical criticism recognized that the Bible was not a suprahuman text that transcends history. Using contemporary techniques of textual analysis, they demonstrated that the bible was a historical document composed by multiple human beings at different times and various places (McCalla, 2007, p. 548). Liberal-minded Christians and Biblical theologians were able to except the higher criticism while continuing to hold the Bible as a source of moral and spiritual guidance. Therefore, both naturalists and educated Christians largely were able to accept the evidence for biological evolution in the years following the publication of Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species (1859). Liberal Christians were able to assimilate the findings of natural science into their religious practice because they had already accepted that Genesis was a mythic story with symbolic truth, not literal truth. Fundamentalist Protestants had a harder time agreeing to any of this (McCalla, 2007, p. 549). 
 The first fundamentalist leader to link biological evolution with the higher criticism was the Baptist William Bell Riley who denounced “theories of organic evolution as unsubstantiated speculations that assert hypothetical historical reconstructions of the Bible and of life in place of God’s plain word  (McCalla, 2007, p. 549). Ultimately this led into the field of creation science. Creation science is defined by the attempt to discredit the evolution model and to support the creation model by asserting “that the evolution model is riddled with guesses, errors, and inconsistencies  (McCalla, 2007. p. 550). Creationists base this argument on four basic claims: “the radiometric and other dating techniques that give an immense age to the universe, the Earth, and life are mere guesses as nobody was around to confirm that the assumptions on which they are built held true in the prehistoric past; the basic laws of physics, and particularly the first and second laws of thermodynamics, flatly contradict the evolution model; the principles of mathematical probability demonstrate its extreme unlikeliness; and evolutionists frequently disagree among themselves, thereby proving that what they have to offer is not science but opinion  (McCalla, 2007. p. 551). 
 The creation-evolution controversy has led to many disagreements on what should and should not be allowed in required educational curriculum (Allgaier, 2010). Specifically, where this debate and controversy takes place heavily is in the more southern regions of the United States. In the 1980s states such as Arkansas and Louisiana passed legislation mandating that the biblical account of creation be taught in science classes in conjunction with the teaching of evolution (Bleifeld, 1983, p. 111). Christian fundamentalists continue to lobby to reintroduce creationism into the education system and where they fail they often set up parallel private school systems or home schooling networks. Opponents argue that a common educational basis is an essential component to democratic society because it lays the foundation for evidence based decision making and rational debate. From a scientific point of view, Creationism has no scientific validity (Allgaier, 2010). That being said the creationist/evolutionary theory debate is an issue that must be handled delicately in order to respect peoples’ deeply held beliefs. 
 Key Terms 
 animism: The religion that believes in the divinity of nonhuman beings, like animals, plants, and objects of the natural world. 
 assimilation: A response to religious diversity that welcomes people of different faiths into the majority culture on the condition that they leave their beliefs behind and adopt the majority’s faith as their own. 
 atheism: Belief in no deities. 
 church: A large, bureaucratically organized religious organization that is closely integrated into the larger society. 
 collective consciousness: The combined mental contents of a society that manifests itself through a religious framework. 
 collective effervescence: A feeling experienced by individuals when they come together to express beliefs and perform rituals together as a group. 
 compensator: A promise of a reward at a later, unspecified date. 
 creationism: The religious belief that the Universe and life originated “from specific acts of divine creation.  For young Earth creationists, this includes a biblical literalist interpretation of the Genesis creation narrative and the rejection of the scientific theory of evolution. 
 cult or New Religious Movement: A small religious organization that is at great odds with the norms and values of the larger society. 
 Darwinian evolutionary theory: A theory stating that all species of organisms arise and develop through the natural selection of small, inherited variations that increase individual organism’s ability to compete, survive, and reproduce. 
 deity: A god or a goddess. 
 denomination: A religious organization that is closely integrated into the larger society but is not a formal part of the state. 
 disenchantment of the world: The process by which magical and superstitious understandings of the world are replaced by scientific calculation and technical control. 
 dualist theodicy: Suffering is explained as a consequence of the struggle between the dual powers of good and evil, gods and demons, in which evil occasionally wins out. 
 ecclesia: A church that has formal ties with the state. 
 exclusion: A response to religious diversity which denies new religions entry into society. 
 family resemblance definition: A type of definition that defines a phenomenon on the basis of a series commonly shared attributes or family resemblances — not all family members equally share these attributes or resemblances. 
 functional definition: A type of definition that defines a phenomenon by what it does or how it functions in society. 
 individual secularization: The decline in religious belief and practice of individuals. 
 karma: The accumulated effects of acts committed in former lives and their influence on fortunes and suffering in this life. 
 Mecca: The birthplace of Muhammad; a city located in Hejaz in the area of what is now known as South Arabia; the holiest city of the Islamic religion, and is the center of Islamic faith. 
 monotheism: A religion based on belief in a single deity. 
 misogyny: A hatred of women. 
 new religious movement (NRM): See “cult.  
 nomos: (In sociology) a stable, predictable, and normative order. 
 organizational secularization: The efforts made by religious organizations to update their beliefs and practices, to reflect changes in contemporary life. 
 phenomenology: A sociological perspective that argues that all phenomena appear spontaneously and immediately within the experience and awareness of individual subjects before they become the basis for subjective and objective reality. 
 pluralism: A response to religious diversity that welcomes every religious practice regardless of how divergent its beliefs or social norms. 
 polytheism: A religion based on belief in multiple deities. 
 post-Christian society: A previously Christian society in which Christianity becomes just one among many religious beliefs. 
 predestination: The belief that the gods predetermine the fate of individuals. 
 profane: Everyday objects, states of being or practices that do not hold any spiritual or religious significance. 
 Protestant ethic: The duty to “work hard in one’s calling.  
 rational choice theory: A theory which states that human action is motivated by individual self-interest and that all social activities are a product of rational decision making that weighs costs against benefits. 
 religion: A system of beliefs, values, and practices concerning what a person holds to be sacred or spiritually significant. 
 religious beliefs: Specific ideas that members of a particular faith hold to be true. 
 religious diversity: A condition in which a multiplicity of religions and faiths co-exist in a given society. 
 religious experience: The conviction or sensation that one is connected to “the divine.  
 religious nones: Persons who choose the category “none  on surveys about religious affiliation. 
 religious rituals: Behaviours or practices that are either required for or expected of the members of a particular group. 
 sacred: Objects, states of being, or practices that are set apart and considered forbidden because of their connection to divine presence. 
 sacred canopy: A devinely grounded cultural system. 
 sati: The Hindu ritual in which a widow sacrifices herself by burning alive on the funeral pyre of her deceased husband. 
 sect: A small religious body that forms after a group breaks away from a larger religious group like a church or denomination. 
 secularization: The process by which religion and the sacred gradually have less validity, influence, and significance in society and the lives of individuals. 
 societal secularization: The shrinking relevance of institutionalized religionfor the integration and legitimation of everyday life in modern society. 
 substantial definition: A type of definition that delineates the substantial or crucial characteristics that define what a phenomenon is and is not. 
 theocracy: A system of government in which ecclesiastical authorities rule on behalf of a divine authority. 
 theodicy: An explanation for why the Gods allow suffering, misfortune and injustice to occur. 
 totem: A plant, animal or object that serves as a symbolic, material expression of the sacred. 
 totemism: The most basic, ancient form of religion based on reverence for totemic animals or plants. 
 ultimate legitimation: An unquestionable foundation that establishes the legitimacy of a social order. 
 Section Summary 
 15.1. The Sociological Approach to Religion Religion describes the beliefs, values, and practices related to sacred or spiritual concerns. Religion is a social institution because it includes beliefs and practices that serve the needs of society. Religion is also an example of a cultural universal because it is found in all societies in one form or another. Sociological terms for different kinds of religious organizations are, in order of decreasing influence in society, ecclesia, denomination, sect, and cult. Religions can be categorized according to what or whom its followers worship. Some of the major types of religion include polytheism, monotheism, atheism, animism, and totemism. 
 15.2. Sociological Explanations of Religion Whereas psychology defines and explains religion in terms of the nature of individual religious experience, sociology explains it in terms of the underlying social relationships it sustains of serves. Social theorist Émile Durkheim defined religion as a “unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things  (1964 [1915]). Max Weber believed religion could be a force for social change. Karl Marx viewed religion as a tool used by capitalist societies to perpetuate inequality. 
 15.3. Religion and Social Change Many of the classical sociological theories predicted that levels of religiosity in Western societies would decline due to the process of secularization. However, while society has certainly become more secular, a large majority of people in Canada still claim religious affiliation. Religion has become more pluralistic in nature in Canada, both in the number of religions that Canadians practice and in the style of religious or spiritual practice they engage in. 
 The clash of secular and religious values in modern society produces issues that are difficult to resolve. The fundamentalist form that many different religions have adopted today makes these issues even more intransigent. 
 Section Quiz 
 The justifications provided as to why God allows bad things happen to good people. 
 The “rules  that a Catholic must follow in order to get into heaven. 
 Types of questions that are concerned with the nature of reality, being and existence. 
 2. Which of the four dimensions of religion explains how religion is experienced as a social phenomenon? 
 community 
 belief 
 unique spiritual experience 
 ritual 
 3. Which of the following options is NOT one of the 5 pillars of Islam? 
 Month long fast on the 9th month of the Islamic calendar. 
 Making offerings to the deities. 
 Pilgrimage to Mecca. 
 4. A sect: 
 Has generally grown so large that it needs new buildings and multiple leaders 
 Often believes it must split from the larger group to return to important fundamentals 
 Is another term for a cult 
 All of the above 
 5. The main difference between an ecclesia and a denomination is: 
 The number of followers or believers is much larger for denominations 
 The geographical location varies for ecclesia versus denominations 
 Ecclesia are state-sponsored and considered an official religion 
 There are no important differences; the terms are interchangeable 
 6. Some controversial groups that may be mislabelled as cults include: 
 7. What is the reason for the origins of religion according to evolutionary psychology? 
 Religion enhances human survival 
 Religion is a meme 
 The origins of religion are unique to each culture 
 Religion is a product of tacit social agreements. 
 8. The Protestant work ethic was viewed in terms of its relationship to: 
 9. Which of the following social functions does religion NOT serve in society? 
 Determines the magnitude of your sinfulness and judges you accordingly 
 Ensures social cohesion 
 Enforces norms and expected behaviors 
 Answers universal questions that other institutions cannot answer 
 10. Which of the following statements is incorrect according to Rodney Stark’s theory of religion? 
 Religions can be distinguished from non-religious organizations by their belief in a supernatural power or force 
 Religion is on a slow but steady decline and will eventually become extinct 
 A religious compensator is an IOU written by God 
 Religious belief is a rational choice made by humans seeking scarce rewards 
 11. Mary Daly’s proposition that “if God is male, then the male is God,  suggests that: 
 All sacred texts were written by males. 
 All Gods, irrespective of religion, are male. 
 All individuals are socialized within their respective religions to see gender in specific ways. 
 14. What are “The: Fundamentals: A Testimony of Truth ? 
 A religious film which highlighted the core values of Christian Fundamentalism in the early 20th century. 
 A famous legal case that took place in Tennessee in 1925 which made it illegal to teach evolution in the 
 American public education system. 
 A widely distributed pamphlet that listed the basic values of Protestantism in the 20th century. 
 The title of Pope Pius’s’s encyclical condemning the modernization of the Catholic church. 
 15. Scientific knowledge replaced religion because it was able to fulfill society’s _________ needs: 
 ultimate 
 social 
 material 
 spiritual 
 16. Which group of Christians believe and accept evolutionary theory, while still maintaining their faith and religious followings of the Bible? 
 Protestant Fundamentalists 
 Naturalists 
 Liberal Christians 
 Evangelicals 
 17. Which of the following statements is INCORRECT regarding the practice of sati? 
 Sati was outlawed in India by British officials in 1829 
 The word sati refers both to the act of a widow burning on her husband’s funeral pyre and the widow (i.e. a “sati ) herself 
 All Hindu sacred texts make mention of sati and condone the practice 
 Roop Kanwar’s sati in 1987 was used to both mobilize and condemn a fundamentalist version of Hinduism 
 Short Answer 
 What aspects of religion are sociologists primarily interested in? 
 What are the strengths and weaknesses of substantial and functional definitions of religion? Do family resemblance definitions resolve these weaknesses? 
 What are some sacred items that you’re familiar with? Are there some objects, such as cups, candles, or clothing, that would be considered profane in normal settings but are considered sacred in special circumstances or when used in specific ways? 
 What are the four dimensions of religion? 
 What are the four noble truths of Buddhism? 
 What is your understanding of monotheism, polytheism, and animism? What are examples of these belief systems in Canada? How do these different belief systems affect relationships to the environment, sexuality, and gender? 
 From an evolutionary psychology point of view, how does religion aid in human survival? 
 How does the collective practice of ritual contribute to social solidarity? 
 According to Rodney Stark’s theory, how is religious belief in the supernatural based on rational choices made by humans? 
 Why is a feminist perspective important to the study of religion? 
 Do you believe Canada is becoming more secularized or more fundamentalist? 
 Comparing your generation to that of your parents or grandparents, what differences do you see in the relationship between religion and society? 
 Why do you think Canada differs from the United States in the role that religion plays in public and political life? 
 How can we explain the rise of religious fundamentalism in contemporary societies? 
 The example of Galileo is one well known historical example of a clash between religion and science. Can you think of other, more recent, examples? What, for example, is the main debate or controversy between creationists and evolutionists? 
 What characteristics of fundamentalism can be seen in the pro-sati movement that followed Roop Kanwar’s immolation? 
 Further Research 
 15.1. The Sociological Approach to Religion For more discussion on the study of sociology and religion, check out The Immanent Frame, a forum for the exchange of ideas about religion, secularism, and society by leading thinkers in the social sciences and humanities: http://blogs.ssrc.org/tif/. 
 Some would argue that the Protestant work ethic is still alive and well in North America. Read British historian Niall Ferguson’s view at http://www.pbs.org/wnet/civilization-west-and-rest/killer-apps/the-work-ethic/excerpt-word-ethic-work-ethic/ 
 Ayahuasca (“the vine of the soul ) is a ceremonial tea used traditionally in animistic healing practices in the Amazonian basin. It is an entheogen that induces visions. For more on how ayahuasca ceremonies have come to the attention of North Americans and Europeans as a promising healing modality, see the CBC Nature of Things episode “Jungle Prescription : http://www.cbc.ca/natureofthings/features/what-is-ayahuasca 
 Secularization is an ambiguous trend, not least because the concept of secularization suggests that being secular or being religious is an either/or proposition. For an exploration of contemporary relationship between secularism and religion see the CBC Ideas series “After Atheism: New Perspectives on God and Religion : http://www.cbc.ca/books/2012/05/after-atheism-ideas-explores-new-perspectives-on-god-and-religion.html 
 References 
 Chua-Eoan, H., & Dias, E. (2013, December 11). Person of the year: Pope Francis. Time. Retrieved November 23, 2015, from http://poy.time.com/2013/12/11/person-of-the-year-pope-francis-the-peoples-pope/. 
 Dawson, L., & Thiessen, J. (2014). The sociology of religion: A Canadian perspective. Don Mills, Ontario: Oxford University Press. 
 Blackburn, C. (2012). Culture loss and crumbling skulls: the problematic of injury in residential school litigation. Political and Legal Anthropology Review, 35(2): 289-307 
 Bruce, S., & Voas, D. (2007). Religion toleration and organizational typologies. Journal of Contemporary Religion, 22 (1): 1-17. 
 Dawson, Lorne. (2007). The meaning and significance of new religious movements. In David G. Bromley (Ed.). Teaching new religious movements. New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Dawson, L., & Theissen, J. (2014). The sociology of religion: A Canadian perspective. Don Mills: Oxford University Press. 
 Dunn, J. (2003). Christianity in the making, volume 1: Jesus remembered. Cambridge, UK: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company 
 Durkheim, Émile. (1964). The elementary forms of religious life. Translated by J. Swain. Glencoe, IL: Free Press. Retrieved Dec. 20, 2015, from http://www.gutenberg.org/files/41360/41360-h/41360-h.htm (original work published 1915) 
 Eisenstaedt, E.N. (Ed). (1968). Max Weber: On charisma and institution building. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Flood, G. (1996). An introduction to Hinduism. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 Glock, Charles and Rodney Stark. (1965). Religion and society in tension. New York: Rand McNally. 
 Guy, L. (2004). Introducing early Christianity: A topical survey of its life, beliefs, and practices. Downers Grove: Illinois: InterVarsity Press. 
 Hanegraaff, H. (2009). The importance of baptism. Christian Research Institute. Retrieved Nov 15, 2015, from http://www.equip.org/article/the-importance-of-baptism/. 
 Healy, J.P. (2011). Involvement in a new religious movement: From discovery to disenchantment. Journal of Spirituality in Mental Health, 13 (1): 2-21. 
 Hoebel, E. A. (1978). The Cheyennes: Indians of the Great Plains (2nd ed.). Dumfries, NC: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
 John, L. (Ed.). (2008). Pillars of Islam. In The Oxford Dictionary of Islam. Cambridge University Press. Retrieved Nov 15, 2015, from http://www.oxfordislamicstudies.com/article/opr/t125/e1859. 
 Johnson, A. (2000). The Blackwell dictionary of sociology. (2nd Ed.). London: UK: Blackwell. 
 Knowles, E. (2005). Nicene creed. In The Oxford Dictionary of Phrase and Fable. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 Malinowski, Bronislaw. (1948). Magic, science, and religion, and other essays. New York: Doubleday. 
 McKelvie, B. A. (1966). Magic, murder and mystery. Duncan BC: Cowichan Leader Ltd. 
 Neeganagwedgin, E. (2014). They can’t take our ancestors out of us: a brief historical account of Canada’s residential school system, incarcerations, institutionalized policies and legislations against indigenous peoples. Canadian Issues, (Spring): 31-36. 
 Rinpoche, M. T. (2001). Buddhism; Wisdom of SAARC: Origin, development and modernization. South Asian Survey, 8(2): 195-201. 
 Ruttan, Stephen. (2009). Brother XII. Local history: Tales from the vault. Greater Victoria Public Library. Retrieved Dec. 28, 2015, from https://gvpl.ca/using-the-library/our-collection/local-history/tales-from-the-vault/brother-xii. 
 Sanders, J. A. (2009). The Book of Job and the origins of Judaism. Biblical Theology Bulletin, 39(2): 60-70. Smith, Johnathan Z. (1982). Imagining religion: From Babylonia to Jonestown. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Stark, R. (1996). The rise of Christianity: How the obscure, marginal Jesus movement became the dominant religious force in the western world in a few centuries. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
 Stark, R. (1999). Micro foundations of religion: A revised theory. Sociological Theory, 17(3): 264-289. 
 Stark, R. & Bainbridge, W.S. (1985). The future of religion: Secularization, revival and cult formation. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
 Taimann, M., and Hassan, F. H. (2015). Convergence of food systems: Kosher, Christian and Halal. British Food Journal, 117(9): 2313-2327. 
 Taylor, Mark. (2007). After God. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Tsering, G.T. (2005). The foundation of Buddhist thought. Boston, MA: Wisdom Publications. 
 Tupper, Kenneth. (2011). Ayahuasca in Canada: Cultural phenomenon and policy issue. In B.C. Labate and H. Jungaberle (Eds.), The Internationalization of Ayahuasca (pp. 319-325) . Zurich: Lit Verlag. 
 Ushama, T. (2014). Is Islam a religion moderation or extremism? A study of key Islamic teachings. Asian Social Science, 10(8): 184-197. 
 Weber, Max. (1958). The social psychology of the world religions. In Hans Gerth and C. Wright Mills (Eds.), From Max Weber: Essays in sociology. New York: Oxford University Press. (original work published 1915) 
 Weber, Max. (1958). The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism. Translated by Talcott Parsons. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons. (original work published 1905) 
 Woods, E. (2013). A cultural approach to a Canadian tragedy: the Indian residential schools as sacred enterprise. International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society, 26(2): 173-187. 
 Abram, David. (1997). The spell of the sensuous: Perception and language in a more-than-human world. NY: Vintage Books. 
 Berger, Peter. (1967). The sacred canopy: Elements of a theory of religion. NY: Doubleday. 
 Carroll, Michael. P. (1996). Stark realities and Eurocentric/Androcentric bias in the sociology of religion. Sociology of Religion, 57(3): 225–239. 
 Daly, M. (1973). Beyond God the Father: Toward a philosophy of women’s liberation. Boston, Ma: Beacon Press. 
 Dawson, L. L. & Thiessen, J. (2014). The sociology of religion: A Canadian perspective. Don Mills, On.: Oxford University Press. 
 Durkheim, Émile. (1964). The elementary forms of religious life. Translated by J. Swain. Glencoe, IL: Free Press. Retrieved Dec. 20, 2015, from http://www.gutenberg.org/files/41360/41360-h/41360-h.htm (original work published 1915) 
 Erikson, V. L. (1992). Back to the basics: Feminist social theory, Durkheim, and religion. Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion, 8(1): 35-46. 
 Scott, John. (Ed.). (2014). Rational choice theory. A dictionary of sociology. Oxford University Press. Retrieved November 14th, 2015 from http://www.oxfordreference.com. 
 Shilling, C., P. Mellor. (1998). Durkheim, morality and modernity: Collective effervescence, homo duplex and the sources of moral action. The British Journal of Sociology, 49(2): 193-209. 
 Shilling, C. (2011). Retheorising Emile Durkheim on society and religion: Embodiment, intoxication, and collective life. The Sociological Review, 59(1): 17-41. 
 Stark, Rodney. (1999a). Micro foundations of religion: A revised theory. Sociological Theory, 17(3): 264–289. 
 Stark, Rodney. (1999b). Secularization, R.I.P. Sociology of Religion, 60(3): 249–273. 
 Stark, Rodney, and William S. Bainbridge. (1985). The future of religion: Secularization, revival and cult formation. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
 Stark, Rodney, and William S. Bainbridge. (1996). A theory of religion. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. (original work published 1987) 
 Trainor, B. (1998). The origin and end of modernity. Journal of Applied Philosophy, 15(2): 133-144. 
 Weber, Max. (1958). The protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism. New York: Scribner. (original work published 1904) 
 Weber, Max. (1958). ‘The social psychology of the world religions’ and ‘Religious rejections of the world and their directions.’ In Hans Gerth (Ed.), From Max Weber: Essays in sociology. New York: Oxford University Press. (original work published 1915) 
 Weber, Max. (1958). Science as a vocation. In Hans Gerth (Ed.), From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology. New York: Oxford University Press. (original work published 1919) 
 Weber, Max. (1958). Bureaucracy. In Hans Gerth (Ed.), From Max Weber: Essays in sociology. New York: Oxford University Press. (original work published 1922) 
 Weber, Max. (1966). General economic history. NY: Collier. 
 Beckford, James. (1992). Religion, modernity and postmodernity. In Bryan Wilson (ed.), Religion: Contemporary issues. London: Bellew. 
 Berger, Peter. (1999). The desecularization of the world: A global overview. In Peter Berger (Ed.), The desecularization of the world: Resurgent religion and world politics (pp. 1-18). Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans. 
 Berry, JW. (1974). Psychological aspects of cultural pluralism: Unity and identity reconsidered. Topics in Culture Learning. 2 (Aug): 17-22. 
 Beyer, P. (1997). Religious vitality in Canada: The complementarity of religious market and secularization perspectives. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 36(2), 272-272. 
 Bibby, Reginald. (1993). Unknown gods: The ongoing story of religion in Canada. Toronto: Stoddart Publishing Co. 
 Bone, M. (2014). From the sacrilegious to the sacramental: A global review of Rastafari cannabis case law. In Beatriz Labate (ed.), Prohibition, religious freedom, and human rights: Regulating traditional drug use. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer. 
 Chevannes, B. (1994). Rastafari: Roots and ideology. New York: Syracuse University Press. 
 Connelly, William. (1999). Why I am not a secularist. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
 Davie, Grace. (1994). Religion in Britain since 1945: Believing without belonging. Oxford, UK: Blackwell. 
 Dawson, Lorne. (1998). Anti-modernism, modernism, and postmodernism: Struggling with the cultural significance of new religious movements. Sociology of Religion, 59(2): 131-156. 
 Dawson, Lorne, & Joel Thiessen. (2014). The sociology of religion. Don Mills, Ontario: Oxford University Press. 
 Fisher, Mary Pat. (1994). Living religions (2nd ed.). New Jersey: Prentice Hall. 
 Frendreis, J., & Tatalovich, R. (2013). Secularization, modernization, or population change: Explaining the decline of prohibition in the United States. Social Science Quarterly, 94(2): 379-394. 
 Hackworth, J., & Gullikson, E. (2012). Giving new meaning to religious conversion: Churches, redevelopment, and secularization in Toronto. The Canadian Geographer / Le Géographe Canadien, 57(1): 72-89. 
 Halman, L., & Ingen, E. (2015). Secularization and changing moral views: European trends in church attendance and views on homosexuality, divorce, abortion, and euthanasia. European Sociological Review, 31(5): 616-627. 
 Hebdige, D. (1997). Subculture: The Meaning of Style. London: Routledge. 
 Hervieu-Léger, Daniele. (2006). In search of certainties: The paradoxes of religiosity in societies of high modernity. The Hedgehog Review, (Spring/Summer): 59-68. 
 International Civil Liberties Alliance. (2013, September 22). The problematic definition of ‘Islamophobia.’ ICLA. Retrieved February 12, 2016, from http://www.libertiesalliance.org/2013/09/22/problematic-definition-islamophobia/. 
 M’Baye, B. (2012). Rastafarianism: 1900 to present: Africa. In A. Stanton, E. Ramsamy, P. Seybolt, & C. Elliott (Eds.). Cultural sociology of the Middle East, Asia, & Africa: An encyclopedia. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc. 
 Moghadam, Valentine. (1992). Fundamentalism and the woman question in Afghanistan. In Lawrence Kaplan (Ed.), Fundamentalism in comparative perspective. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press. 
 Murrell, S., Spencer, W., McFarlane, A., & Chisholm, C. (Eds.). (1998). Chanting down Babylon: The Rastafari reader. Pennsylvania: Temple University Press. 
 Pew Research Center. (2013, June 27). Canada’s changing religious landscape. Pew Research Center: Religion & Public Life. Retrieved Feb. 12, 2016, from http://www.pewforum.org/2013/06/27/canadas-changing-religious-landscape/. 
 Raza, Raheel. (2015, September 15). Ban Niqab, burka in all public places. Toronto Sun. Retrieved Dec. 14, 2015, from http://www.torontosun.com/2015/09/15/ban-niqab-burka-in-all-public-places. 
 Statistics Canada. (2001). Religious groups in Canada. [PDF] Catalogue no. 85F0033MIE. Retrieved Feb. 12, 2016, from http://www.statcan.gc.ca/sites/default/files/85f0033m2001007-eng.pdf. 
 Statistics Canada. (2011). National Household Survey. Catalogue no. 99-010-X2011032. Retrieved Feb. 12, 2016, from http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/dp-pd/dt-td/Rp-eng.cfm?LANG=E&APATH=3&DETAIL=0&DIM=0&FL=A&FREE=0&GC=0&GID=0&GK=0&GRP=0&PID=105399&PRID=0&PTYPE=105277&S=0&SHOWALL=0&SUB=0&Temporal=2013&THEME=95&VID=0&VNAMEE=&VNAMEF= 
 Statistics Canada. (2013, May 8). 2011 National Household Survey. Catalogue no. 99-010-X2011032. Retrieved Dec. 21, 2015, from http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/dp-pd/dt-td/Rp-eng.cfm?LANG=E&APATH=3&DETAIL=0&DIM=0&FL=A&FREE=0&GC=0&GID=0&GK=0&GRP=0&PID=105399&PRID=0&PTYPE=105277&S=0&SHOWALL=0&SUB=0&Temporal=2013&THEME=95&VID=0&VNAMEE=&VNAMEF= 
 Waldram, James, D. Ann Herring and T. Kue Young. (2006). Aboriginal health in Canada. Historical, cultural, and epidemiological perspectives. (2nd Edition). Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
 Waters, A. (1985). Race, class, and political symbols: Rastafari and Reggae in Jamaican politics. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers. 
 Wuthnow, Robert. (2005). America and the challenges of religious diversity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press 
 Zayzafoon, L. (2005). The production of the Muslim woman: Negotiating text, history, and ideology. Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books. 
 Allgaier, J. (2010). Scientific experts and the controversy about teaching creation/evolution in the UK Press. Science and Education, 8(10): 797-819. 
 Ayala, F.J. (2006). Evolution vs. creationism. History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences, 28(1): 71-82. 
 Berger, P. (1967). The sacred canopy: Elements of a theory of religion. New York: Doubleday. 
 Berger, P. (1999). The desecularization of the world: Resurgent religion and world politics. Washington, D.C.: Ethics and Public Policy Center. 
 Berman, M. (1981). The reenchantment of the world. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
 Bleifeld, M. (1983). Creationism vs. evolution—Is education the prime target? NASSP Bulletin, 67(459): 111-117. 
 Bruce, S. (1999). Choice and religion: A critique of rational choice theory. New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Butler, A. (1998). Godly women: Fundamentalism and female power. N.J.: Rutgers University Press. 
 Casanova, J. (1994). Public religions in the modern world. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
 CBC News. (2008, August 8). Church members enter Canada, aiming to picket bus Victim’s funeral. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved December 14, 2015, from http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/church-members-enter-canada-aiming-to-picket-bus-victim-s-funeral-1.703285. 
 Chhachhi, Amrita. (1989). The state, religious fundamentalism and women: Trends in South Asia. Economic and Political Weekly, 24(11), 567–578. 
 Chehabi, Houchang E. (1993). Staging the emperor’s new clothes: Dress codes and nation‐building under Reza Shah. Iranian Studies, 26(3-4): 209-233. 
 Dawson, Lorne L. (2006). Privatization, globalization, and religious innovation: Giddens’ theory of modernity and the refutation of secularisation theory. In James A. Beckford and John Wallis. (Eds.), Theorizing religion: Classical and contemporary debates (pp. 110-12). Aldershot, UK: Ashgate. 
 Doumato, Eleanor Abdella. (2010). Saudhi Arabia. In Sanja Kelly and Julia Breslin (Eds.), Women’s rights in the Middle East and North Africa: Progress amid resistance. NY: Freedom House 
 Evans, J. (2011). Epistemological and moral conflict between religion and science. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 50(4): 707-727. 
 Hadden, J. (1987). Towards desacralizing secularization theory. Social Forces, 65: 587-611. 
 Hadden, J., Shupe, A. (Eds.). (1989). Secularization and fundamentalism reconsidered. New York, NY: Paragon House. 
 Harlan, Lindsey. (1994). Perfection and devotion: Sati tradition in Rajasthan. In J.S. Hawley (Ed.), Sati, the blessing and the curse: The burning of wives in India. (1st ed.: 79-99). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
 Hawley, John S. (Ed.). (1994a). Sati, the blessing and the curse: The burning of wives in India. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
 Hawley, John S. (Ed.). (1994b). Fundamentalism and gender. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
 Higgins, Patricia J. (1985). Women in the Islamic Republic of Iran: Legal, social, and ideological changes. Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 10(3): 477-494. 
 Holtzman, S. (2003). Science and religion: The categorical conflict. International Journal for Philosophy of Religion, 54: 77-99. 
 Hurdle, J. (2007, October 31). Kansas church liable in Marine funeral protest. Reuters. Retrieved December 14, 2015, from http://www.reuters.com/article/us-iraq-gay-lawsuit-idUSN3134225120071031. 
 Kaplan, Esther. (2005). With God on their side: George W. Bush and the Christian Right. NY: New Press. 
 Kershner, I. (2011, December 27). Israeli girl, 8, at Center of Tension Over Religious Extremism. The New York Times. Retrieved December 14, 2015, from http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/28/world/middleeast/israeli-girl-at-center-of-tension-over-religious-extremism.html?pagewanted=all. 
 Mahmood, Saba. (2005). Politics of piety: The Islamic revival and the feminist subject. Princeton NY: Princeton University Press. 
 McCalla, A. (2007). Creationism. Religion Compass, 1(5): 547-560. 
 Moaddel, M. (1998). Religion and women: Islamic modernism versus fundamentalism. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 37(1): 108-130. 
 Moghadam, Valentine. (1992). Fundamentalism and the woman question in Afghanistan. In Lawrence Kaplan (ed.), Fundamentalism in comparative perspective. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press. 
 Müller, M. (1873). Introduction to the science of religion: Four lectures delivered at the Royal Institution with two essays on false analogies, and the philosophy of mythology. London: Longmans. 
 Narasimhan, Sakuntala. (1992). Sati: Widow burning in India. New York, NY: Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, Inc. 
 Pew Research Center. (2015a, November 2). U.S. public becoming less religious. Retrieved December 15, 2015, from http://www.pewforum.org/2015/11/03/u-s-public-becoming-less-religious/. 
 Riesebrodt, Martin. (1993). Pious passion: The emergence of modern fundamentalism in the United States and Iran. London: I.B. Taurus. 
 Russel, M. (1989). Catholic astronomers and the Copernican system after the condemnation of Galileo. Annals of Science, 46, 365-386. 
 Ruthven, M. (2004). Fundamentalism the search for meaning. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Stark, R., Iannaccone, L. (1994). A supply-side reinterpretation of the “secularization  of Europe. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 33 (3): 230-52. 
 Stark, R. (1999). Secularization: RIP.  Sociology of Religion, 60: 249-73. 
 Weber, Max. (1958). Science as a vocation. In H. H. Gerth & C. Wright Mills (Eds.). From Max Weber. New York, NY: Free Press. (original work published 1919) 
 Weber, M. (1993). The sociology of religion. Boston, MA: Beacon Press. 
 Wilson, B. (1982). Religion in sociological perspective. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
 Wilson, B. (1985). Secularization: The inherited model. In Phillip Hammond (Ed.), The Sacred in a Secular Age. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
 Wilson, D.S. (2002). Darwin’s cathedral: Evolution, religion, and the nature of society. Evolution and Human Behaviour. 24: 137-143. 
 Yang, Anand A. (1989). Whose Sati?: Widow burning in early 19th century India. Journal of Women’s History, 1(2): 8-33. 
 List of Contributors to Chapter 15: Religion 
 Introduction to Religion–Benjamin Wilson 
 15.1. The Sociological Approach to Religion 
 The Four Dimensions of Religion–Hannah Mitchell 
 Table 15.2. The Religions of the World–Mikaiya Austin 
 Residential Schools and the Church–Courtney Locker 
 Types of Religious Organization–Marvin Moses Omoding 
 Brother XII and the Aquarian Foundation–Robyn Erickson 
 15.4 Contemporary Fundamentalist Movements 
 Creationism and Darwinian Evolutionary Theory–Gary Brett Armbrust 
 Image Attributions 
 Figure 15.1. The elephant-headed Ganesh by Rob Brownie used by permission of the photographer. 
 Figure 15.2. Life of Francis of Assisi by José Benlliure y Gil by Ras67 (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Josep_Benlliure_Gil43.jpg) used under Public Domain Mark 1.0 (https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/mark/1.0/) 
 Figure 15.6. Conversion of Saul by Michelangelo (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Conversion_of_Saint_Paul_%28Michelangelo_Buonarroti%29.jpg) is in the public domain. 
 Figure 15.8. King of Kings by Joe Shlabotnik (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Solid_Rock_megachurch.jpg) used under a CC BY 2.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en) 
 Figure 15.9. Hutterite girl holding her baby sister by Galt Museum & Archives (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Hutterites#/media/File:Hutterite_girl_holding_her_baby_sister_%283380762768%29.jpg). No known copyright restrictions exist. 
 Figure 15.11. Brother Twelve, Cover illustration for The Wide World magazine, December, 1942 (http://www.brotherxii.com/legend.html) is in the public domain. 
 Figure 15.12. Brother Twelve, photographer unknown, from McKelvie, 1966 (http://www.fadedpage.com/books/20140421/html.php) is in the public domain (http://www.fadedpage.com/showbook.php?pid=20140421#chap01) 
 Figure 15.13. The Flammarion engraving from Camille Flammarion’s L’atmosphère: météorologie populaire (1888) (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flammarion.jpg#/media/File:Flammarion.jpg) is in the public domain. 
 Figure 15.14. When bachelor dens cast over waking hours a loneliness so deep from the Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division (http://www.loc.gov/pictures/resource/cph.3b10901/) is in the public domain 
 Figure 15.15. Mary Baker Eddy, founder of Christian Science, from a tintype given to Mrs. Sarah Crosby in the summer of 1864 by unknown (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mary_Baker_Eddy,_c._1864.jpg) is in the public domain 
 Figure 15.7. Detail from The Last Judgment (Jacob de Backer, 1580s) by BurgererSF (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Devil#/media/File:Backer_Judgment_%28detail%29.JPG) is in the public domain. 
 Figure 15.19. Peter Berger by unknown photographer (http://www.pewforum.org/2008/03/04/between-relativism-and-fundamentalism-is-there-a-middle-ground/) used under Pew Research Center use policy (http://www.pewresearch.org/about/use-policy/). 
 Figure 15.20. Jesus Loves Wal*Mart by Mark Trammell (https://www.flickr.com/photos/chasingfun/151479749/in/photolist-5vbS4n-e6nQix-eonDP-aJVtL-769hV6-73LfAV-95vZVa-69pcgr-7V2uo4-7V5NvL-7V5Nfj-dy8sUj-oFqPeb-7Hdeyj-42GDC-e6nQLx-4dqCxM-7V5Myo-9TQPZ-e6tuaN-7V5KxG-7V5K3A-7V2uQ8-7V5KfJ-7V2v5i-csXWvs-6afRXs-5dCQ3-42GEA-7V2uAX-7V2w14-7V5NMd-csYeY3-7V2zh4-7V5N1j-7V2x9n-7V2wRP-7V2xtx-7V5LjN-7V2y2e-mgWZM-dFeeEx-audoPd-md3d1-5XMFJp-mgV8S-bHUde-7AuNHJ-r6Mh1P-5XRWow) used under a CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.0/) 
 Figure 15.21. Fertility Goddess (Chalcolithic, Cypress, 3000-2500 BC) Limestone by Dave & Margie Hill (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Getty_Villa_-_Collection_%285304799159%29.jpg) used under a CC BY-SA 2.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/deed.en) 
 Figure 15.24. Friedrich Nietzsche (circa 1875) by by F. Hartmann in Basel, scan by Anton (2005) (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nietzsche187a.jpg) is in the public domain. 
 Table 15.3. “What Style of Dress is Appropriate for Women in Public?  by Mansoor Moaddel (http://mevs.org/files/tmp/Tunisia_FinalReport.pdf) used under PEW Research Center’s Use Policy (http://www.pewresearch.org/about/use-policy/) 
 Figure 15.25. The Shaman by Temari 09 ( https://www.flickr.com/photos/34053291@N05/3293379585/in/photolist-622r1D-5QrmbZ-5VLNTL-fchCni-dWBsDx-eeyPTf-9WH8pw-5QvCS9-fFXvP-4uwzex-9Z48g6-dCL7uT-5L4cPZ-5UF1uK-rUweQe-eethg8-9Ua7DF-5wssAX-fo8vBn-6SVey1-8TWSFh-9GfoMi-4BBZXw-8vivMs-fiQ5wC-7Qer3j-dmQEum-5QrkV2-dPNQnh-5QvCAh-4uwzjD-B2qpAV-agvMky-4nLTHT-ac2pJs-61GfQ9-5Qr3rP-agvMkm-BAnvkj-5CSDvt-5QvjTb-7QaY1c-ac2pJo-aiLHfH-4uAB61-dPNQe5-5QvCqQ-dmQDZJ-5Qr3t4-9GfwaZ) used underCC BY-NC-ND 2.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.0/). 
 Figure 15.26. Bob Marley by Monosnaps (https://www.flickr.com/photos/dubpics/5619834259/in/album-72157626374515435/) used under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 license ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.0/) 
 Figure 15.27. David Woroniecki with Sign by Saraware (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:DavidWoronieckiWithSign.jpg) used under CC by 3.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/deed.en) 
 Figure 15.28. Descent of the Modernists, E. J. Pace, Christian Cartoons, 1922 by E.J. Pace, with modifications by Luinfana (https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4d/Descent_of_the_Modernists%2C_E._J._Pace%2C_Christian_Cartoons%2C_1922.png) used under Public Domain Mark 1.0 (https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/mark/1.0/) 
 Figure 15.29. Women protesting during Iranian Revolution in 1979 by Khabar (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Iranian_Revolution_Women.jpg) is in the public domain. 
 Figure 15.30. The Sati of Ramabai, Wife of Madhavrao Peshwa by Anonymous (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:The_Sati_of_Ramabai.jpg) is in the public domain. Figure 15.31. Galileo Galilei by Ottavio Leoni (1623) (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Galileo_Galilei#/media/File:Galileo_by_leoni.jpg) is in the public domain. 
 Figure 15.32. Anti-Evolution League, at the Scopes Trial, Dayton Tennessee From Literary Digest, July 25, 1925 by Mike Licht (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Anti-EvolutionLeague.jpg) used under CC BY 2.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en) 
 Solutions to Section Quiz 
 Long Descriptions 
 Figure 15.6 Long Description: A painting of God in the sky, surrounded by his angels, with his hand pointed down and beam of light shining from it. Below, people look panicked and stare up at the sky. Many have fallen and one man has fainted. [Return to Figure 15.6] 
 Figure 15.28 long description: A cartoon entitled, “The Descent of the Modernists.  Three men walk down a staircase. Each stair represents a rejection of a fundamental christian belief. From top to bottom, the stairs read, “Christianity,  “Bible not infallible,  “Man not made in God’s image,  “No miracles,  “No virgin birth,  “No deity,  “No atonement,  “No resurrection,  and “Agnosticism.  The last stair is labeled “Atheism.  [Return to Figure 15.28] 

 id="file23242660" filename="christians-and-their-ancestors-a-dilemma-of-african-theology" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.religion-online.org/article/christians-and-their-ancestors-a-dilemma-of-african-theology/">
 Christians and Their Ancestors: A Dilemma of African Theology 
 Dr. Partain, a religion professor at Gardner-Webb College in Boiling Springs, North Carolina, taught at the Baptist Seminary of East Africa, Arusha, Tanzania, for 13 years. 
 This article appeared in the Christian Century, November 26, 1986, p. 1066. Copyright by the Christian Century Foundation and used by permission. Current articles and subscription information can be found at www.christiancentury.org. This material was prepared for Religion Online by Ted & Winnie Brock. 
 SUMMARY 
 By incorporating ancestors into Christian theology, African theologians clearly flirt with danger — and they know it. But the relationship to ancestors is so basic to the African sense of selfhood and society, and the pastoral problems created by negative and foreign approaches to the issue so widespread and destructive, that theologians feel compelled to attempt such a synthesis. 
 It is easy to be bullish on the growth of the church in Africa. On a continent where barely a million people were Christians at the turn of the century, there will be, if current trends continue, as many as 350 million Christians by the end of the century -- equal to the number in North America. 
 Yet many thoughtful African Christians are concerned about the future of African Christianity. They note that almost one-third of those 350 million will be first-generation Christians. Moreover, they see that many Africans -- both Christians and non-Christians think of Christianity as a foreign religion. The gospel is often not seen as offering resources for life’s most deeply felt experiences. When face to face with death or famine or infertility, many African Christians resort to traditional rites and beliefs. 
 At issue is a problem more nettlesome than the usual one of nominal Christian commitment. Rather, the central question is: Has there been an authentic engagement between the gospel of Christ and the cultures of Africa? More broadly stated: Does the gospel have a place everywhere in the modern world? Can authentic Christian faith flourish in every culture? 
 Important answers to these questions may arise in Africa. Andrew Walls believes that "what happens within the African churches in the next generation will determine the whole shape of Church history for centuries to come." He continues: "A high proportion of the world’s serious theological thinking and writing will have to be done in Africa if it is to be done at all" ("Towards Understanding Africa’s Place in Christian History," in Religion in a Pluralistic Society). edited by John S. Pobee [Brill, 1976], pp. 182-184) 
 Serious theological work is being done in Africa. Since the mid-1950, African theologians like John Mbiti, Edward Fashole-Luke, Desmond Tutu, Vincent Mulago and Harry Sawyerr have made it their mission to bring the gospel to bear on Africans’ lives and thought-worlds -- to make Christianity indigenous on a continent that first heard the gospel in New Testament times. 
 A major focus of these theologians is on the need to address some of the specific frustrations of African Christian spirituality. Of particular importance is the question of Christians’ relationships to their dead ancestors. In traditional thinking, ancestors are an essential link in a hierarchical chain of powers stretching from this world to the spirit world. Insofar as African traditional religion can be defined by specific "religious" actions, the cult of the ancestors is its most common and essential activity. 
 In order to understand the importance of ancestors one must realize that in the African view, death is not thought to end human relationships. Rather, those who die enter the spirit world in which they are invisible. Though the spirit world is a radically different world, it is also a "carbon copy of the countries where [the ancestors] lived in this life" (John S. Mbiti, Concepts of God in Africa [SPCK, 1970], p. 259). Deceased ancestors remain close by, as part of the family, sharing meals and maintaining an interest in family affairs -- just as before death. Yet they are thought to have advanced mystical power, which enables them to communicate easily with both the family and God. Thus they are considered indispensable intermediaries. 
 Deceased ancestors are integral to the traditional African social structure. In a culture where tribe, clan and family are of utmost importance, ancestors are the most respected members of the family. To be cut off from relationships with one’s ancestors is to cease to be a whole person. Moreover, the ancestors sanction society’s customs, norms and ethics. Without them, Africans are left without moral guidelines or motivation, and society is powerless to enforce ethics. 
 Rites for the dead are simple and omnipresent. The presence of the "living dead" is often acknowledged, particularly at meals or when drinking. Small portions are set aside or spilled on their behalf. In times of extremity, expensive gifts may be offered to them to gain relief or enlist their help. 
 Thus, a widespread "dichotomy of the soul" has grown up, in which believers assent to orthodox Christian belief and join in the denunciations of the ancestor rites, but privately retain their loyalty to the tradition -- especially in times of serious misfortune or death. South Africa’s new archbishop, Desmond Tutu, once lamented: "I, though a third-generation Christian, knowing only urban life with a father who was headmaster of an Anglican primary school, feel this division within my own soul" ("The Ancestor Cult and Its Influence on Ethical Issues," Ministry [July 1969], pp. 103-4) 
 On the other hand, some independent African churches, which have arisen without missionary tutelage -- while officially taking a harsh stance against traditional beliefs -- make use of prophets who play a role similar to that of the mganga -- traditional doctors -- in the ancestor cult. Other independent churches that affirm African tradition as essential to their faith encourage participation in the ancestor cult as a part of the Christian life. Some observers believe that the phenomenal growth of these independent churches is directly attributable to the mission churches’ strident attacks on African traditions. 
 Many African theologians -- themselves highly educated and westernized Christians -- speak of their passionate desire to be linked with their dead and of their own inner struggle. Tswana theologian and poet Gabriel M. Setiloane speaks for many African Christians: 
 The dead are not dead; they are ever near us; 
 Approving and disapproving all our actions, 
 For kindness shown, and strangers made to feel at home. 
 They increase our store, and punish our pride 
 ["How the Traditional World-View Persists in the Christianity of the Sotho-Tswana," in Christianity in Independent Africa, edited by Edward Fashole-Luke (Indiana University Press, 1978) , p. 407]. 
 The theological issue facing African church leaders is both pastoral and existential. If the Christian faith is to have any real effect in African life, it must accept and address the spirit world. "We Africans cannot ignore the dead," Tutu insists. "A Christianity that has no place for them speaks in alien tones" ("The Ancestor Cult," p. 100) John Mbiti, one of East Africa’s most widely read thinkers, adds that "until Christianity can penetrate [the spirit world], it will for a long time remain on the surface" (New Testament Eschatology in an African Background [Ecumenical Institute, WCC, 1977], p. 155). 
 African theologians are the first to admit that this agenda is extremely delicate. Biblical evidence concerning relations with the dead is scant, and the issue certainly has not been of major interest among Western theologians. Church leaders also agree that some traditional notions about ancestors cannot be accepted by Christians. For instance, Christians cannot accept the view that ancestors have power over living family members, and they must emphatically deny that deaths are caused by ancestors. And divination, a primary preoccupation of the ancestral cult, is entirely unacceptable. 
 However, with these (and in some cases other) reservations, many theologians embrace or adapt traditional beliefs about ancestors. As theologian S. E. Serote insists, "Christian Africa must have a Christian ancestry" ("Meaningful Christian Worship for Africa," in Relevant Theology for Africa, edited by Hans-Jurgen Becken [Lutheran Publishing House, 1973], p. 150). In developing a Christian theology that speaks to the African understanding of ancestors, these theologians are confident that their insights will enrich worldwide Christianity. 
 According to these African theologians, the main tenets of traditional thinking about the spirit world do not really conflict with Christianity at all, but in fact parallel the New Testament understanding of a spirit-inhabited world. Furthermore, they say, there is no reason for Christian thought to be bound to a rationalistic, materialistic, scientific world view. A group of theologians who gathered in 1962 declared: 
 It is not part of the Christian Gospel to impart a particular metaphysic, but to speak to each man where he is. . . . It is necessary to present the Gospel in a form which meets that large area of human experience which is essentially irrational [quoted in African Independent Church Movements, edited by Victor E.W. Hayward (Edinburgh House Press, 1963), p. 74]. 
 The theologians also agree with the traditional belief that death "is not the end of the story" (John V. Taylor, The Primal Vision [SCM, 1963], p. 165). To be sure, relations with a dead person are different from relations with someone who is living. But there is continuity; death is but another passage. In particular, family ties are not severed by death; the tribe or clan lives on. And most to the point: those who are in Christ enter a fellowship that "death can neither dissolve or weaken" (Mbiti, Eschatology, p. 147). Christians of all people, they note, should assert this reality. 
 The theologians do not all agree, however, on the precise nature of the relationship with ancestors. Some accept the cultic ways as more or less valid, intending to ‘christianize" the underlying concepts. For instance, Jabulani A. Nxumalo, a South African pastor, believes that the cult is essentially an indigenous process for celebrating death and grieving, and thus it presents no theological problems. The customs are but "gestures of respect toward the dead" (‘Christ and the Ancestors in the African World," Journal of Theology for Southern Africa [September 1980], p. 12). And M. Lyunungu goes so far as to include ancestors in his list of saints -- much as the writer of Hebrews included Old Testament heroes, who were also, as he points out, pagans ("Social Approach to the Ritual Activity of Man," Service [2-4, 1975], p. 47) In each case these writers believe that a purified ancestor cult can be baptized into Christian practice without doing violence to Christian belief. 
 A more prominent approach is to define the relationship with the ancestors in terms of the communion of the saints. From the beginning of the African theology movement, it has been suggested that this Christian doctrine can be revived, revised and given new prominence from within the African context. Western churches have tended to neglect this doctrine, but most of these theologians see the reality confessed by the ancient church – "I believe . . . in the communion of saints" as the fulfillment and Christian expression of Africa’s concept of community, which includes the dead. For this reason, John Taylor asked in 1963, "Is it not time for the church to learn to give the Communion of Saints the centrality which the soul of Africa craves?" (Primal Vision, p. 166). 
 By defining the communion of saints as "a spiritual fellowship which is based upon union with God in Christ through baptism," theologian Edward Fashole-Luke leaves open the question of whether this holy company includes all ancestors or only confessing Christians ("Veneration and Communion of Saints," in New Testament Christianity for Africa and for the World, edited by M. E. Glasswell and Edward Fashole-Luke [SPCK, 1974], p. 215) This position seems deliberately ambiguous. "We cannot simply say that the African ancestor can be embraced within the framework of the universal Church and included in the Communion of Saints," says Fashole-Luke (p. 216). But the Christian can remember with confidence that "the death of Christ is for the whole world and no one either living or dead is outside the scope of the merits of Christ’s death" (p. 217). 
 From this perspective, the church leaders readily accept their ancestors into the framework of the church universal. They believe that the old clan or tribal solidarity is fulfilled and universalized in Christ, who is the Ancestor of a worldwide family that is vitally related to all who have died. In this way, the African sense of human wholeness and solidarity is given prominence in Christian doctrine, and any alien individualism is overcome. 
 As Fashole-Luke and Mbiti suggest, the communion is described best in terms of intercession. Since Christians do not believe that the "living dead" have power to bless or harm, no one suggests that it is correct for Christians to pray to the ancestors (as in the traditional cult) But is it conceivable, they ask, that the relationship to one’s forebears -- which is so intrinsic to African personhood -- should be totally erased by death? Just as one’s parents prayed for their children while they were living, can it not be assumed that they will continue to do so after they die? "The intercession of the departed who are with Christ," Fashole-Luke writes, "is a legitimate consequence of the fellowship in prayer which unites the whole body of Christ" (p. 219). 
 But what about intercession on behalf of the ancestors -- especially those who were not Christians? Does one pray for them expecting some effect? Nxumalo speaks for many African theologians when he insists that such intercession is a Christian responsibility -- since duties to one’s elders are not changed by death (p. 20). Harry Sawyerr asserts that because intercessory prayer is a two-way exchange, the firm bond that cements us to our ancestors, some ancestors might be saved as an outcome of this intercession (Creative Evangelism: Towards a New Christian Encounter with Africa [Lutterworth, 1968], pp. 95, 137). Fashole-Luke is sure of the same effect and adds that Christians must "recover the practice of the ancient North African Church and pray in faith for the departed, both Christian and non-Christian. This will provide the Africans with that link with their dead which they so much desire" (p. 219). 
 Affirming this mystical bond with the "living dead" is seen as a particularly appropriate part of the Eucharist, when Christians declare their corporate existence in the body of Christ. With Christ as the bridge that binds the living and the dead, Christians "can pray for their ancestors and plead that the one, all-sufficient sacrifice of Christ may be effective in their case also" (Fashole-Luke, Veneration, p. 217). 
 By incorporating ancestors into Christian theology, African theologians clearly flirt with danger -- and they know it. But the relationship to ancestors is so basic to the African sense of selfhood and society, and the pastoral problems created by negative and foreign approaches to the issue so widespread and destructive, that theologians feel compelled to attempt such a synthesis. What they are reaching toward may offer a richer corporate understanding of personhood and of church for all Christians. In any case, the issue is crucial for Africa, for as Hans Haselbarth insists, "It is only in the way of a common Christian ancestorship and heritage of faith that the church is going to take root in African soil" ("The Place of Ancestors in a Christian Theology for Africa," Ministry [July 1967], p. 174). 

 id="file23242727" filename="Christian_theology" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christian_theology">
 Christian theology is the theology of Christian belief and practice.[1] Such study concentrates primarily upon the texts of the Old Testament and of the New Testament, as well as on Christian tradition. Christian theologians use biblical exegesis, rational analysis and argument. Theologians may undertake the study of Christian theology for a variety of reasons, such as in order to: 
 draw on the resources of the Christian tradition to address some present situation or perceived need[6] 
 Christian theology varies significantly across the main branches of Christian tradition: Catholic, Orthodox and Protestant. Each of those traditions has its own unique approaches to seminaries and ministerial formation. 
 Systematic theology as a discipline of Christian theology formulates an orderly, rational and coherent account of Christian faith and beliefs.[7] Systematic theology draws on the foundational sacred texts of Christianity, while simultaneously investigating the development of Christian doctrine over the course of history, particularly through philosophical evolution. Inherent to a system of theological thought is the development of a method, one which can apply both broadly and particularly. Christian systematic theology will typically explore: 
 Prolegomena: Scripture as the basis of theology[edit] 
 Revelation is the revealing or disclosing, or making something obvious through active or passive communication with God, and can originate directly from God or through an agent, such as an angel.[citation needed] A person recognised as having experienced such contact is often called[by whom?] a prophet. Christianity generally considers the Bible as divinely or supernaturally revealed or inspired. Such revelation does not always require the presence of God or an angel. For instance, in the concept which Catholics call interior locution, supernatural revelation can include just an inner voice heard by the recipient. 
 General revelation occurs through observation of the created order. Such observations can logically lead to important conclusions, such as the existence of God and some of God's attributes. General revelation is also an element of Christian apologetics.[citation needed] 
 Certain specifics, such as the Trinity and the Incarnation, as revealed in the teachings of the Scriptures, can not otherwise be deduced except by special revelation. 
 Rembrandt's The Evangelist Matthew Inspired by an Angel, 1661 
 The Bible contains many passages in which the authors claim divine inspiration for their message or report the effects of such inspiration on others. Besides the direct accounts of written revelation (such as Moses receiving the Ten Commandments inscribed on tablets of stone), the Prophets of the Old Testament frequently claimed that their message was of divine origin by prefacing the revelation using the following phrase: "Thus says the LORD" (for example, 1 Kgs 12:22–24;1 Chr 17:3–4; Jer 35:13; Ezek 2:4; Zech 7:9; etc.). The Second Epistle of Peter claims that "no prophecy of Scripture ... was ever produced by the will of man, but men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit"[8] The Second Epistle of Peter also implies that Paul's writings are inspired (2 Pet 3:16). 
 Many[quantify] Christians cite a verse in Paul's letter to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3:16–17, as evidence that "all scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable ..." Here St. Paul is referring to the Old Testament, since the scriptures have been known by Timothy from "infancy" (verse 15). Others offer an alternative reading for the passage; for example, theologian C. H. Dodd suggests that it "is probably to be rendered" as: "Every inspired scripture is also useful..."[9] A similar translation appears in the New English Bible, in the Revised English Bible, and (as a footnoted alternative) in the New Revised Standard Version. The Latin Vulgate can be so read.[10] Yet others defend the "traditional" interpretation; Daniel B. Wallace calls the alternative "probably not the best translation."[11] 
 Some modern English versions of the Bible renders theopneustos with "God-breathed" (NIV) or "breathed out by God" (ESV), avoiding the word inspiration, which has the Latin root inspīrāre - "to blow or breathe into".[12] 
 Some Christians infer that the Bible cannot both refer to itself as being divinely inspired and also be errant or fallible. For if the Bible were divinely inspired, then the source of inspiration being divine, would not be subject to fallibility or error in that which is produced. For them, the doctrines of the divine inspiration, infallibility, and inerrancy, are inseparably tied together. The idea of biblical integrity is a further concept of infallibility, by suggesting that current biblical text is complete and without error, and that the integrity of biblical text has never been corrupted or degraded.[13] Historians[which?] note, or claim, that the doctrine of the Bible's infallibility was adopted[when?] hundreds of years after the books of the Bible were written.[19] 
 Early Christians used the Septuagint, a Koine Greek translation of the Hebrew scriptures. Christianity subsequently endorsed various additional writings that would become the New Testament. In the 4th century a series of synods, most notably the Synod of Hippo in AD 393, produced a list of texts equal to the 46-book canon of the Old Testament that Catholics use today (and the 27-book canon of the New Testament that all use). A definitive list did not come from any early ecumenical council.[20] Around 400, Jerome produced the Vulgate, a definitive Latin edition of the Bible, the contents of which, at the insistence of the Bishop of Rome, accorded with the decisions of the earlier synods. This process effectively set the New Testament canon, although examples exist of other canonical lists in use after this time.[citation needed] 
 During the 16th-century Protestant Reformation certain reformers proposed different canonical lists of the Old Testament. The texts which appear in the Septuagint but not in the Jewish canon fell out of favor, and eventually disappeared from Protestant canons. Catholic Bibles classify these texts as deuterocanonical books, whereas Protestant contexts label them as the Apocrypha. 
 Many Reformed theologians distinguish between the communicable attributes (those that human beings can also have) and the incommunicable attributes (those which belong to God alone).[22] 
 Some attributes ascribed to God in Christian theology[23] are:[citation needed] 
 Aseity—That "God is so independent that he does not need us."[24] It is based on Acts 17:25, where it says that God "is not served by human hands, as if he needed anything" (NIV). This is often related to God's self-existence and his self-sufficiency. 
 Graciousness—That God extends His favor and gifts to human beings unconditionally as well as conditionally. 
 Immanence—That although God is transcendent and holy, He is also accessible and can be dynamically experienced. 
 Immutability—That God's essential nature is unchangeable. 
 Impassibility—That God does not experience emotion or suffering (a more controversial doctrine, disputed especially by open theism). 
 Incorporeality—That God is without physical composition. A related concept is the spirituality of God, which is derived from Jesus' statement in John 4:24, "God is spirit." 
 Love—That God is care and compassion. 1 John 4:16 says "God is love." 
 Mission—That God is the supreme liberator. While the Mission of God is not traditionally included in this list, David Bosch has argued that "mission is not primarily an activity of the church, but an attribute of God."[25] 
 Omnipotence—That God is supremely or all-powerful. 
 Omnipresence—That God is the supreme being, existing everywhere and at all times; the all-perceiving or all-conceiving foundation of reality. 
 Oneness—That God is without peer, also that every divine attribute is instantiated in its entirety (the qualitative infinity of God). See also Monotheism and Divine simplicity. 
 Providence—That God watches over His creation with interest and dedication. While the Providence of God usually refers to his activity in the world, it also implies his care for the universe, and is thus an attribute. A distinction is usually made between "general providence" which refers to God's continuous upholding the existence and natural order of the universe, and "special providence" which refers to God's extraordinary intervention in the life of people.[26] See also Sovereignty. 
 Righteousness—That God is the greatest or only measure of human conduct. The righteousness of God may refer to his holiness, to his justice, or to his saving activity through Christ. 
 Triune—The Christian God is understood (by trinitarian Christians) to be a "threeness" of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit that is fully consistent with His "oneness"; a single infinite being who is both within and beyond nature. Because the persons of the Trinity represent a personal relation even on the level of God to Himself, He is personal both in His relation toward us and in His relation toward Himself. 
 Veracity—That God is the Truth all human beings strive for; He is also impeccably honest. Titus 1:2 refers to "God, who does not lie." 
 Wisdom—That God fully comprehends human nature and the world, and will see His will accomplished in heaven and on earth. Romans 16:27 speaks about the "only wise God". 
 Some Christians believe that the God worshiped by the Hebrew people of the pre-Christian era had always revealed himself as he did through Jesus; but that this was never obvious until Jesus was born (see John 1). Also, though the Angel of the Lord spoke to the Patriarchs, revealing God to them, some believe it has always been only through the Spirit of God granting them understanding, that men have been able to perceive later that God himself had visited them. 
 This belief gradually developed into the modern formulation of the Trinity, which is the doctrine that God is a single entity (Yahweh), but that there is a trinity in God's single being, the meaning of which has always been debated. This mysterious "Trinity" has been described as hypostases in the Greek language (subsistences in Latin), and "persons" in English. Nonetheless, Christians stress that they only believe in one God. 
 Most Christian churches teach the Trinity, as opposed to Unitarian monotheistic beliefs. Historically, most Christian churches have taught that the nature of God is a mystery, something that must be revealed by special revelation rather than deduced through general revelation. 
 Christian orthodox traditions (Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Protestant) follow this idea, which was codified in 381 and reached its full development through the work of the Cappadocian Fathers. They consider God to be a triune entity, called the Trinity, comprising the three "Persons"; God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit, described as being "of the same substance" (ὁμοούσιος). The true nature of an infinite God, however, is commonly described as beyond definition, and the word 'person' is an imperfect expression of the idea. 
 Some critics contend that because of the adoption of a tripartite conception of deity, Christianity is a form of tritheism or polytheism. This concept dates from Arian teachings which claimed that Jesus, having appeared later in the Bible than his Father, had to be a secondary, lesser, and therefore distinct god. For Jews and Muslims, the idea of God as a trinity is heretical– it is considered akin to polytheism. Christians overwhelmingly assert that monotheism is central to the Christian faith, as the very Nicene Creed (among others) which gives the orthodox Christian definition of the Trinity does begin with: "I believe in one God". 
 In the 3rd century, Tertullian claimed that God exists as the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit—the three personae of one and the same substance.[28] To trinitarian Christians God the Father is not at all a separate god from God the Son (of whom Jesus is the incarnation) and the Holy Spirit, the other hypostases (Persons) of the Christian Godhead.[28] According to the Nicene Creed, the Son (Jesus Christ) is "eternally begotten of the Father", indicating that their divine Father-Son relationship is not tied to an event within time or human history. 
 In Christianity, the doctrine of the Trinity states that God is one being who exists, simultaneously and eternally, as a mutual indwelling of three Persons: the Father, the Son (incarnate as Jesus), and the Holy Spirit (or Holy Ghost). Since earliest Christianity, one's salvation has been very closely related to the concept of a triune God, although the Trinitarian doctrine was not formalized until the 4th century. At that time, the Emperor Constantine convoked the First Council of Nicaea, to which all bishops of the empire were invited to attend. Pope Sylvester I did not attend but sent his legate. The council, among other things, decreed the original Nicene Creed. 
 "Holy Trinity" from the Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow, by Andrei Rublev, c. 1400, but more properly known as the "Hospitality of Abraham." The three angels symbolize the Trinity. 
 For most Christians, beliefs about God are enshrined in the doctrine of Trinitarianism, which holds that the three persons of God together form a single God. The Trinitarian view emphasizes that God has a will and that God the Son has two wills, divine and human, though these are never in conflict (see Hypostatic union). However, this point is disputed by Oriental Orthodox Christians, who hold that God the Son has only one will of unified divinity and humanity (see Miaphysitism). 
 The Christian doctrine of the Trinity teaches the unity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit as three persons in one Godhead.[29] The doctrine states that God is the Triune God, existing as three persons, or in the Greek hypostases,[30] but one being.[31] Personhood in the Trinity does not match the common Western understanding of "person" as used in the English language—it does not imply an "individual, self-actualized center of free will and conscious activity."[32]: 185–186. To the ancients, personhood "was in some sense individual, but always in community as well."[32]: p.186 Each person is understood as having the one identical essence or nature, not merely similar natures. Since the beginning of the 3rd century[33] the doctrine of the Trinity has been stated as "the one God exists in three Persons and one substance, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit."[34] 
 Most, if not all, Christians believe that God is spirit,[John 4:24] an uncreated, omnipotent, and eternal being, the creator and sustainer of all things, who works the redemption of the world through his Son, Jesus Christ. With this background, belief in the divinity of Christ and the Holy Spirit is expressed as the doctrine of the Trinity,[35] which describes the single divine ousia (substance) existing as three distinct and inseparable hypostases (persons): the Father, the Son (Jesus Christ the Logos), and the Holy Spirit.[1 Jn 5:7] 
 The Trinitarian doctrine is considered by most Christians to be a core tenet of their faith. Nontrinitarians typically hold that God, the Father, is supreme; that Jesus, although still divine Lord and Savior, is the Son of God; and that the Holy Spirit is a phenomenon akin to God's will on Earth. The holy three are separate, yet the Son and the Holy Spirit are still seen as originating from God the Father. 
 The New Testament does not have the term "Trinity" and nowhere discusses the Trinity as such. Some emphasize, however, that the New Testament does repeatedly speak of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit to "compel a trinitarian understanding of God."[36] The doctrine developed from the biblical language used in New Testament passages such as the baptismal formula in Matthew 28:19 and by the end of the 4th century it was widely held in its present form. 
 In many monotheist religions, God is addressed as the father, in part because of his active interest in human affairs, in the way that a father would take an interest in his children who are dependent on him and as a father, he will respond to humanity, his children, acting in their best interests.[37] In Christianity, God is called "Father" in a more literal sense, besides being the creator and nurturer of creation, and the provider for his children.[Heb 1:2–5] [Gal 4:1–7] The Father is said to be in unique relationship with his only begotten (monogenes) son, Jesus Christ, which implies an exclusive and intimate familiarity: "No one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and any one to whom the Son chooses to reveal him."[Mt. 11:27] 
 In Christianity, God the Father's relationship with humanity is as a father to children—in a previously unheard-of sense—and not just as the creator and nurturer of creation, and the provider for his children, his people. Thus, humans, in general, are sometimes called children of God. To Christians, God the Father's relationship with humanity is that of Creator and created beings, and in that respect he is the father of all. The New Testament says, in this sense, that the very idea of family, wherever it appears, derives its name from God the Father,[Eph 3:15] and thus God himself is the model of the family. 
 However, there is a deeper "legal" sense in which Christians believe that they are made participants in the special relationship of Father and Son, through Jesus Christ as his spiritual bride. Christians call themselves adopted children of God.[38] 
 In the New Testament, God the Father has a special role in his relationship with the person of the Son, where Jesus is believed to be his Son and his heir.[Heb. 1:2–5]. According to the Nicene Creed, the Son (Jesus Christ) is "eternally begotten of the Father", indicating that their divine Father-Son relationship is not tied to an event within time or human history. See Christology. The Bible refers to Christ, called "The Word" as present at the beginning of God's creation.[John 1:1], not a creation himself, but equal in the personhood of the Trinity. 
 In Eastern Orthodox theology, God the Father is the "principium" (beginning), the "source" or "origin" of both the Son and the Holy Spirit, which gives intuitive emphasis to the threeness of persons; by comparison, Western theology explains the "origin" of all three hypostases or persons as being in the divine nature, which gives intuitive emphasis to the oneness of God's being.[citation needed] 
 Christology is the field of study within Christian theology which is primarily concerned with the nature, person, and works of Jesus Christ, held by Christians to be the Son of God. Christology is concerned with the meeting of the human (Son of Man) and divine (God the Son or Word of God) in the person of Jesus. 
 Primary considerations include the Incarnation, the relationship of Jesus' nature and person with the nature and person of God, and the salvific work of Jesus. As such, Christology is generally less concerned with the details of Jesus' life (what he did) or teaching than with who or what he is. There have been and are various perspectives by those who claim to be his followers since the church began after his ascension. The controversies ultimately focused on whether and how a human nature and a divine nature can co-exist in one person. The study of the inter-relationship of these two natures is one of the preoccupations of the majority tradition. 
 Teachings about Jesus and testimonies about what he accomplished during his three-year public ministry are found throughout the New Testament. Core biblical teachings about the person of Jesus Christ may be summarized that Jesus Christ was and forever is fully God (divine) and fully human in one sinless person at the same time,[39] and that through the death and resurrection of Jesus, sinful humans can be reconciled to God and thereby are offered salvation and the promise of eternal life via his New Covenant. While there have been theological disputes over the nature of Jesus, Christians believe that Jesus is God incarnate and "true God and true man" (or both fully divine and fully human). Jesus, having become fully human in all respects, suffered the pains and temptations of a mortal man, yet he did not sin. As fully God, he defeated death and rose to life again. Scripture asserts that Jesus was conceived, by the Holy Spirit, and born of his virgin mother Mary without a human father.[40] The biblical accounts of Jesus' ministry include miracles, preaching, teaching, healing, Death, and resurrection. The apostle Peter, in what has become a famous proclamation of faith among Christians since the 1st century, said, "You are the Christ, the Son of the living God."[Matt 16:16] Most Christians now wait for the Second Coming of Christ when they believe he will fulfill the remaining Messianic prophecies. 
 Christ is the English term for the Greek Χριστός (Khristós) meaning "the anointed one".[41] It is a translation of the Hebrew מָשִׁיחַ‎ (Māšîaḥ), usually transliterated into English as Messiah. The word is often misunderstood to be the surname of Jesus due to the numerous mentions of Jesus Christ in the Christian Bible. The word is in fact used as a title, hence its common reciprocal use Christ Jesus, meaning Jesus the Anointed One or Jesus the Messiah. Followers of Jesus became known as Christians because they believed that Jesus was the Christ, or Messiah, prophesied about in the Old Testament, or Tanakh. 
 The Christological controversies came to a head over the persons of the Godhead and their relationship with one another. Christology was a fundamental concern from the First Council of Nicaea (325) until the Third Council of Constantinople (680). In this time period, the Christological views of various groups within the broader Christian community led to accusations of heresy, and, infrequently, subsequent religious persecution. In some cases, a sect's unique Christology is its chief distinctive feature, in these cases it is common for the sect to be known by the name given to its Christology. 
 The decisions made at First Council of Nicaea and re-ratified at the First Council of Constantinople, after several decades of ongoing controversy during which the work of Athanasius and the Cappadocian Fathers were influential. The language used was that the one God exists in three persons (Father, Son, and Holy Spirit); in particular it was affirmed that the Son was homoousios (of one substance) with the Father. The Creed of the Nicene Council made statements about the full divinity and full humanity of Jesus, thus preparing the way for discussion about how exactly the divine and human come together in the person of Christ (Christology). 
 Nicaea insisted that Jesus was fully divine and also human. What it did not do was make clear how one person could be both divine and human, and how the divine and human were related within that one person. This led to the Christological controversies of the 4th and 5th centuries of the Christian era. 
 According to the Bible, the second Person of the Trinity, because of his eternal relation to the first Person (God as Father), is the Son of God. He is considered (by Trinitarians) to be coequal with the Father and Holy Spirit. He is all God and all human: the Son of God as to his divine nature, while as to his human nature he is from the lineage of David.[Rom 1:3–4][42] The core of Jesus' self-interpretation was his "filial consciousness", his relationship to God as child to parent in some unique sense[21] (see Filioque controversy). His mission on earth proved to be that of enabling people to know God as their Father, which Christians believe is the essence of eternal life.[Jn 17:3] 
 God the Son is the second person of the Trinity in Christian theology. The doctrine of the Trinity identifies Jesus of Nazareth as God the Son, united in essence but distinct in person with regard to God the Father and God the Holy Spirit (the first and third persons of the Trinity). God the Son is co-eternal with God the Father (and the Holy Spirit), both before Creation and after the End (see Eschatology). So Jesus was always "God the Son", though not revealed as such until he also became the "Son of God" through incarnation. "Son of God" draws attention to his humanity, whereas "God the Son" refers more generally to his divinity, including his pre-incarnate existence. So, in Christian theology, Jesus was always God the Son,[43] though not revealed as such until he also became the Son of God through incarnation. 
 The exact phrase "God the Son" is not in the New Testament. Later theological use of this expression reflects what came to be standard interpretation of New Testament references, understood to imply Jesus' divinity, but the distinction of his person from that of the one God he called his Father. As such, the title is associated more with the development of the doctrine of the Trinity than with the Christological debates. There are over 40 places in the New Testament where Jesus is given the title "the Son of God", but scholars don't consider this to be an equivalent expression. "God the Son" is rejected by anti-trinitarians, who view this reversal of the most common term for Christ as a doctrinal perversion and as tending towards tritheism. 
 Matthew cites Jesus as saying, "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called sons of God (5:9)." The gospels go on to document a great deal of controversy over Jesus being the Son of God, in a unique way. The book of the Acts of the Apostles and the letters of the New Testament, however, record the early teaching of the first Christians– those who believed Jesus to be both the Son of God, the Messiah, a man appointed by God, as well as God himself. This is evident in many places, however, the early part of the book of Hebrews addresses the issue in a deliberate, sustained argument, citing the scriptures of the Hebrew Bible as authorities. For example, the author quotes Psalm 45:6 as addressed by the God of Israel to Jesus. 
 Hebrews 1:8. About the Son he says, "Your throne, O God, will last for ever and ever." 
 The author of Hebrews' description of Jesus as the exact representation of the divine Father has parallels in a passage in Colossians. 
 Colossians 2:9–10. "in Christ all the fullness of the Deity lives in bodily form" 
 John's gospel quotes Jesus at length regarding his relationship with his heavenly Father. It also contains two famous attributions of divinity to Jesus. 
 John 1:1. "the Word was God" [in context, the Word is Jesus, see Christ the Logos] 
 John 20:28. "Thomas said to him, 'My Lord and my God!'" 
 The most direct references to Jesus as God are found in various letters. 
 The biblical basis for later trinitarian statements in creeds is the early baptism formula found in Matthew 28. 
 Matthew 28:19. Go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name [note the singular] of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. See also Great Commission. 
 The various Christological positions, and their names 
 Only divine? 
 Docetism (from the Greek verb to seem) taught that Jesus was fully divine, and his human body was only illusory. At a very early stage, various Docetic groups arose; in particular, the gnostic sects which flourished in the 2nd century AD tended to have Docetic theologies. Docetic teachings were attacked by St. Ignatius of Antioch (early 2nd century), and appear to be targeted in the canonical Epistles of John (dates are disputed, but range from the late 1st century among traditionalist scholars to the late 2nd century among critical scholars). 
 The Council of Nicaea rejected theologies that entirely ruled out any humanity in Christ, affirming in the Nicene Creed the doctrine of the Incarnation as a part of the doctrine of the Trinity. That is, that the second person of the Trinity became incarnate in the person Jesus and was fully human. 
 The early centuries of Christian history also had groups at the other end of the spectrum, arguing that Jesus was an ordinary mortal. The Adoptionists taught that Jesus was born fully human, and was adopted as God's Son when John the Baptist baptised him[44] because of the life he lived. Another group, known as the Ebionites, taught that Jesus was not God, but the human Moshiach (messiah, anointed) prophet promised in the Hebrew Bible. 
 Some of these views could be described as Unitarianism (although that is a modern term) in their insistence on the oneness of God. These views, which directly affected how one understood the Godhead, were declared heresies by the Council of Nicaea. Throughout much of the rest of the ancient history of Christianity, Christologies that denied Christ's divinity ceased to have a major impact on the life of the church. 
 Arianism affirmed that Jesus was divine, but taught that he was nevertheless a created being (there was [a time] when he was not [in existence]), and was therefore less divine than God the Father. The matter boiled down to one iota; Arianism taught Homoiousia—the belief that Jesus's divinity is similar to that of God the Father—as opposed to Homoousia—the belief that Jesus's divinity is the same as that of God the Father. Arius' opponents additionally included in the term Arianism the belief that Jesus' divinity is different from that of God the Father (Heteroousia). 
 Arianism was condemned by the Council of Nicea, but remained popular in the northern and western provinces of the empire, and continued to be the majority view of western Europe well into the 6th century. Indeed, even the Christian legend of Constantine's death-bed baptism involves a bishop who, in recorded history, was an Arian. 
 In the modern era, a number of denominations have rejected the Nicene doctrine of the Trinity, including the Christadelphians and the Jehovah's Witnesses.[45] 
 What sort of amalgamation? 
 The Christological debates following the Council of Nicaea sought to make sense of the interplay of the human and divine in the person of Christ while upholding the doctrine of the Trinity. Apollinaris of Laodicea (310–390) taught that in Jesus, the divine component took the place of the human nous (thinking– not to be confused with thelis, meaning intent). This however was seen as a denial of Jesus' true humanity, and the view was condemned at the First Council of Constantinople. 
 Subsequently, Nestorius of Constantinople (386–451) initiated a view that effectively separated Jesus into two persons—one divine and one human; the mechanism of this combination is known as hypostases, and contrasts with hypostasis—the view that there is no separation. Nestorius' theology was deemed heretical at the First Council of Ephesus (431). Though, as seen by the writings of Babai the Great, the Christology of the Church of the East is highly similar to that of Chalcedon, many orthodox Christians (particularly in the West) consider this group to be the perpetuation of Nestorianism; the modern Assyrian Church of the East has at times shunned this term, as it implies acceptance of the entire theology of Nestorius. 
 Various forms of Monophysitism taught that Christ only had one nature: that the divine had either dissolved (Eutychianism), or that the divine joined with the human as one nature in the person of Christ (Miaphysitism). A notable monophysite theologian was Eutyches (c. 380–456). Monophysitism was rejected as heresy at the Council of Chalcedon in 451, which affirmed that Jesus Christ had two natures (divine and human) joined in one person, in hypostatic union (see Chalcedonian creed). While Eutychianism was suppressed into oblivion by the Chalcedonians and Miaphysites, the Miaphysite groups who dissented from the Chalcedonian formula have persisted as the Oriental Orthodox Church. 
 As theologians continued to search for a compromise between the Chalcedonian definition and the Monophysites, other Christologies developed that partially rejected the full humanity of Christ. Monothelitism taught that in the one person of Jesus there were two natures, but only a divine will. Closely related to this is Monoenergism, which held to the same doctrine as the Monothelites, but with different terminology. These positions were declared heresy by the Third Council of Constantinople (the Sixth Ecumenical Council, 680–681). 
 The Incarnation is the belief in Christianity that the second person in the Christian Godhead, also known as God the Son or the Logos (Word), "became flesh" when he was miraculously conceived in the womb of the Virgin Mary. The word Incarnate derives from Latin (in=in or into, caro, carnis=flesh) meaning "to make into flesh" or "to become flesh". The incarnation is a fundamental theological teaching of orthodox (Nicene) Christianity, based on its understanding of the New Testament. The incarnation represents the belief that Jesus, who is the non-created second hypostasis of the triune God, took on a human body and nature and became both man and God. In the Bible its clearest teaching is in John 1:14: "And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us."[46] 
 In the Incarnation, as traditionally defined, the divine nature of the Son was joined but not mixed with human nature[47] in one divine Person, Jesus Christ, who was both "truly God and truly man". The Incarnation is commemorated and celebrated each year at Christmas, and also reference can be made to the Feast of the Annunciation; "different aspects of the mystery of the Incarnation" are celebrated at Christmas and the Annunciation.[48] 
 In recent decades, an alternative doctrine known as "Oneness" has been espoused among various Pentecostal groups (see below), but has been rejected by the remainder of Christendom. 
 Description and development of the traditional doctrine 
 In the early Christian era, there was considerable disagreement amongst Christians regarding the nature of Christ's Incarnation. While all Christians believed that Jesus was indeed the Son of God, the exact nature of his Sonship was contested, together with the precise relationship of the "Father," "Son" and "Holy Ghost" referred to in the New Testament. Though Jesus was clearly the "Son," what exactly did this mean? Debate on this subject raged most especially during the first four centuries of Christianity, involving Jewish Christians, Gnostics, followers of the Presbyter Arius of Alexandra, and adherents of St. Athanasius the Great, among others. 
 Eventually, the Christian Church accepted the teaching of St. Athanasius and his allies, that Christ was the incarnation of the eternal second person of the Trinity, who was fully God and fully a man simultaneously. All divergent beliefs were defined as heresies. This included Docetism, which said that Jesus was a divine being that took on human appearance but not flesh; Arianism, which held that Christ was a created being; and Nestorianism, which maintained that the Son of God and the man, Jesus, shared the same body but retained two separate natures. The Oneness belief held by certain modern Pentecostal churches is also seen as heretical by most mainstream Christian bodies. 
 The most widely accepted the early Christian Church made definitions of the Incarnation and the nature of Jesus at the First Council of Nicaea in 325, the Council of Ephesus in 431, and the Council of Chalcedon in 451. These councils declared that Jesus was both fully God: begotten from, but not created by the Father; and fully man: taking his flesh and human nature from the Virgin Mary. These two natures, human and divine, were hypostatically united into the one personhood of Jesus Christ.[49] 
 Fortuitous and Necessary Incarnation 
 The link between the Incarnation and the Atonement within systematic theological thought is complex. Within traditional models of the Atonement, such as Substitution, Satisfaction or Christus Victor, Christ must be Divine in order for the Sacrifice of the Cross to be efficacious, for human sins to be "removed" or "conquered". In his work The Trinity and the Kingdom of God, Jurgen Moltmann differentiated between what he called a "fortuitous" and a "necessary" Incarnation. The latter gives a soteriological emphasis to the Incarnation: the Son of God became a man so that he could save us from our sins. The former, on the other hand, speaks of the Incarnation as a fulfilment of the Love of God, of his desire to be present and living amidst humanity, to "walk in the garden" with us. 
 Moltmann favours "fortuitous" incarnation primarily because he feels that to speak of an incarnation of "necessity" is to do an injustice to the life of Christ. Moltmann's work, alongside other systematic theologians, opens up avenues of liberation Christology. 
 In short, this doctrine states that two natures, one human and one divine, are united in the one person of Christ. The Council further taught that each of these natures, the human and the divine, was distinct and complete. This view is sometimes called Dyophysite (meaning two natures) by those who rejected it. 
 Hypostatic union (from the Greek for substance) is a technical term in Christian theology employed in mainstream Christology to describe the union of two natures, humanity and divinity, in Jesus Christ. A brief definition of the doctrine of two natures can be given as: "Jesus Christ, who is identical with the Son, is one person and one hypostasis in two natures: a human and a divine."[50] 
 The First Council of Ephesus recognised this doctrine and affirmed its importance, stating that the humanity and divinity of Christ are made one according to nature and hypostasis in the Logos. 
 The First Council of Nicaea declared that the Father and the Son are of the same substance and are co-eternal. This belief was expressed in the Nicene Creed. 
 Apollinaris of Laodicea was the first to use the term hypostasis in trying to understand the Incarnation.[51] Apollinaris described the union of the divine and human in Christ as being of a single nature and having a single essence– a single hypostasis. 
 The Nestorian Theodore of Mopsuestia went in the other direction, arguing that in Christ there were two natures (dyophysite) (human and divine) and two hypostases (in the sense of "essence" or "person") that co-existed.[52] 
 The Chalcedonian Creed agreed with Theodore that there were two natures in the Incarnation. However, the Council of Chalcedon also insisted that hypostasis be used as it was in the Trinitarian definition: to indicate the person and not the nature as with Apollinarius. 
 Thus, the Council declared that in Christ there are two natures; each retaining its own properties, and together united in one subsistence and in one single person.[53] 
 As the precise nature of this union is held to defy finite human comprehension, the hypostatic union is also referred to by the alternative term "mystical union." 
 The Oriental Orthodox Churches, having rejected the Chalcedonian Creed, were known as Monophysites because they would only accept a definition that characterized the incarnate Son as having one nature. The Chalcedonian "in two natures" formula was seen as derived from and akin to a Nestorian Christology.[54] Contrariwise, the Chalcedonians saw the Oriental Orthodox as tending towards Eutychian Monophysitism. However, the Oriental Orthodox have in modern ecumenical dialogue specified that they have never believed in the doctrines of Eutyches, that they have always affirmed that Christ's humanity is consubstantial with our own, and they thus prefer the term "Miaphysite" to refer to themselves (a reference to Cyrillian Christology, which used the phrase "mia physis tou theou logou sesarkomene"). 
 In recent times, leaders from the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox Churches have signed joint statements in an attempt to work towards reunification. 
 Although Christian orthodoxy holds that Jesus was fully human, the Epistle to the Hebrews, for example, states that Christ was 'holy and without evil' (7:26). The question concerning the sinlessness of Jesus Christ focuses on this seeming paradox. Does being fully human require that one participate in the "fall" of Adam, or could Jesus exist in an "unfallen" status as Adam and Eve did before the "fall," according to Genesis 2–3? 
 Kinds of sinlessness 
 Evangelical writer Donald Macleod suggests that the sinless nature of Jesus Christ involves two elements. "First, Christ was free of actual sin."[55] Studying the gospels there is no reference to Jesus praying for the forgiveness of sin, nor confessing sin. The assertion is that Jesus did not commit sin, nor could he be proven guilty of sin; he had no vices. In fact, he is quoted as asking, "Can any of you prove me guilty of sin?" in John 8:46. "Secondly, he was free from inherent sin ("original sin" or "ancestral sin")."[55] 
 Temptation of Christ 
 The temptation of Christ shown in the gospels affirms that he was tempted. Indeed, the temptations were genuine and of a greater intensity than normally experienced by human beings.[56] He experienced all the frail weaknesses of humanity. Jesus was tempted through hunger and thirst, pain and the love of his friends. Thus, the human weaknesses could engender temptation.[57] Nevertheless, MacLeod notes that "one crucial respect in which Christ was not like us is that he was not tempted by anything within himself."[57] 
 The temptations Christ faced focused upon his person and identity as the incarnate Son of God. MacLeod writes, "Christ could be tempted through his sonship." The temptation in the wilderness and again in Gethsemane exemplifies this arena of temptation. Regarding the temptation of performing a sign that would affirm his sonship by throwing himself from the pinnacle of the temple, MacLeod observes, "The sign was for himself: a temptation to seek reassurance, as if to say, 'the real question is my own sonship. I must forget all else and all others and all further service until that is clear.'"[58] MacLeod places this struggle in the context of the incarnation, "...he has become a man and must accept not only the appearance but the reality."[58] 
 Communication of attributes 
 The communion of attributes (Communicatio idiomatum) of Christ's divine and human natures is understood according to Chalcedonian theology to mean that they exist together with neither overriding the other. That is, both are preserved and coexist in one person. Christ had all the properties of God and humanity. God did not stop being God and become man. Christ was not half-God and half-human. The two natures did not mix into a new third kind of nature. Although independent, they acted in complete accord; when one nature acted, so did the other. The natures did not commingle, merge, infuse each other, or replace each other. One was not converted into the other. They remained distinct (yet acted with one accord). 
 The Gospel according to Matthew and Gospel according to Luke suggest a virgin birth of Jesus Christ. Some now disregard or even argue against this "doctrine" to which most denominations of Christianity ascribe. This section looks at the Christological issues surrounding belief or disbelief in the virgin birth. 
 A non-virgin birth would seem to require some form of adoptionism. This is because a human conception and birth would seem to yield a fully human Jesus, with some other mechanism required to make Jesus divine as well. 
 A non-virgin birth would seem to support the full humanity of Jesus. William Barclay: states, "The supreme problem of the virgin birth is that it does quite undeniably differentiate Jesus from all men; it does leave us with an incomplete incarnation."[59] 
 Barth speaks of the virgin birth as the divine sign "which accompanies and indicates the mystery of the incarnation of the Son."[60] 
 Donald MacLeod[61] gives several Christological implications of a virgin birth: 
 Highlights salvation as a supernatural act of God rather than an act of human initiative. 
 Avoids adoptionism (which is virtually required if a normal birth). 
 Reinforces the sinlessness of Christ, especially as it relates to Christ being outside the sin of Adam (original sin). 
 Relationship of Persons 
 The discussion of whether the three distinct persons in the Godhead of the Trinity were of greater, equal, or lesser by comparison was also, like many other areas of early Christology, a subject of debate. In Athenagoras of Athens (c. 133–190) writings we find a very developed trinitarian doctrine.[62][63] On the one end of the spectrum was modalism, a doctrine stating that the three persons of the Trinity were equal to the point of erasing their differences and distinctions. On the other end of the spectrum were tritheism as well as some radically subordinationist views, the latter of which emphasized the primacy of the Father of Creation to the deity of Christ and Jesus's authority over the Holy Spirit. During the Council of Nicea, the modalist bishops of Rome and Alexandria aligned politically with Athanasius; whereas the bishops of Constantinople (Nicomedia), Antioch, and Jerusalem sided with the subordinationists as middle ground between Arius and Athanasius. 
 Theologians like Jurgen Moltmann and Walter Kasper have characterized Christologies as anthropological or cosmological. These are also termed 'Christology from below' and 'Christology from above' respectively. An anthropological Christology starts with the human person of Jesus and works from his life and ministry toward what it means for him to be divine; whereas, a cosmological Christology works in the opposite direction. Starting from the eternal Logos, a cosmological Christology works toward his humanity. Theologians typically begin on one side or the other and their choice inevitably colors their resultant Christology. As a starting point, these options represent "diverse yet complementary" approaches; each poses its own difficulties. Both Christologies 'from above' and 'from below' must come to terms with the two natures of Christ: human and divine. Just as light can be perceived as a wave or as a particle, so Jesus must be thought in terms of both his divinity and humanity. You cannot talk about "either or" but must talk about "both and".[64] 
 Cosmological approaches 
 Christologies from above start with the Logos, the second Person of the Trinity, establish his eternality, his agency in creation, and his economic Sonship. Jesus' unity with God is established by the Incarnation as the divine Logos assumes a human nature. This approach was common in the early church—e.g., St. Paul and St. John in the Gospels. The attribution of full humanity to Jesus is resolved by stating that the two natures mutually share their properties (a concept termed communicatio idiomatum).[65] 
 Anthropological approaches 
 Christologies from below start with the human being Jesus as the representative of the new humanity, not with the pre-existent Logos. Jesus lives an exemplary life, one to which we aspire in religious experience. This form of Christology lends itself to mysticism, and some of its roots go back to emergence of Christ mysticism in the 6th century East, but in the West it flourished between the 11th and 14th centuries. A recent theologian Wolfhart Pannenberg contends that the resurrected Jesus is the "eschatological fulfillment of human destiny to live in nearness to God."[66] 
 Political approaches 
 The Christian faith is inherently political because allegiance to Jesus as risen Lord relativises all earthly rule and authority. Jesus is called "Lord" over 230 times in Paul's epistles alone, and is thus the principal confession of faith in the Pauline epistles. Further, N.T. Wright argues that this Pauline confession is the core of the gospel of salvation. The Achilles' heel of this approach is the loss of eschatological tension between this present age and the future divine rule that is yet to come. This can happen when the state co-opts Christ's authority as was often the case in imperial Christology. Modern political Christologies seek to overcome imperialist ideologies.[67] 
 The resurrection is perhaps the most controversial aspect of the life of Jesus Christ. Christianity hinges on this point of Christology, both as a response to a particular history and as a confessional response.[68] Some Christians claim that because he was resurrected, the future of the world was forever altered. Most Christians believe that Jesus' resurrection brings reconciliation with God (II Corinthians 5:18), the destruction of death (I Corinthians 15:26), and forgiveness of sins for followers of Jesus Christ. 
 After Jesus had died, and was buried, the New Testament states that he appeared to others in bodily form. Some skeptics say his appearances were only perceived by his followers in mind or spirit. The gospels state that the disciples believed they witnessed Jesus' resurrected body and that led to the beginning of the faith. They had previously hid in fear of persecution after Jesus' death. After seeing Jesus they boldly proclaimed the message of Jesus Christ despite tremendous risk. They obeyed Jesus' mandate to be reconciled to God through repentance (Luke 24:47), baptism, and obedience (Matthew 28:19–20). 
 Pneumatology is the study of the Holy Spirit. Pneuma (πνεῦμα) is Greek for "breath", which metaphorically describes a non-material being or influence. In Christian theology pneumatology refers to the study of the Holy Spirit. In Christianity, the Holy Spirit (or Holy Ghost) is the Spirit of God. Within mainstream (Trinitarian) Christian beliefs he is the third person of the Trinity. As part of the Godhead, the Holy Spirit is equal with God the Father and with God the Son. The Christian theology of the Holy Spirit was the last piece of Trinitarian theology to be fully developed. 
 The English word comes from two Greek words: πνευμα (pneuma, spirit) and λογος (logos, teaching about). Pneumatology would normally include study of the person of the Holy Spirit, and the works of the Holy Spirit. This latter category would normally include Christian teachings on new birth, spiritual gifts (charismata), Spirit-baptism, sanctification, the inspiration of prophets, and the indwelling of the Holy Trinity (which in itself covers many different aspects). Different Christian denominations have different theological approaches. 
 Christians believe that the Holy Spirit leads people to faith in Jesus and gives them the ability to live a Christian lifestyle. The Holy Spirit dwells inside every Christian, each one's body being his temple.[1 Cor 3:16] Jesus described the Holy Spirit[Jn 14:26] as paracletus in Latin, derived from Greek. The word is variously translated as Comforter, Counselor, Teacher, Advocate,[77] guiding people in the way of the truth. The Holy Spirit's action in one's life is believed to produce positive results, known as the Fruit of the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit enables Christians, who still experience the effects of sin, to do things they never could do on their own. These spiritual gifts are not innate abilities "unlocked" by the Holy Spirit, but entirely new abilities, such as the ability to cast out demons or simply bold speech. Through the influence of the Holy Spirit, a person sees more clearly the world around him or her and can use his or her mind and body in ways that exceed his or her previous capacity. A list of gifts that may be bestowed include the charismatic gifts of prophecy, tongues, healing, and knowledge. Christians holding a view known as cessationism believe these gifts were given only in New Testament times. Christians almost universally agree that certain "spiritual gifts" are still in effect today, including the gifts of ministry, teaching, giving, leadership, and mercy.[Rom 12:6–8] The experience of the Holy Spirit is sometimes referred to as being anointed. 
 After his resurrection, Christ told his disciples that they would be "baptized with the Holy Spirit" and would receive power from this event,[Ac 1:4–8] a promise that was fulfilled in the events recounted in the second chapter of Acts. On the first Pentecost, Jesus' disciples were gathered in Jerusalem when a mighty wind was heard and tongues of fire appeared over their heads. A multilingual crowd heard the disciples speaking, and each of them heard them speaking in his or her native language. 
 The Holy Spirit is believed to perform specific divine functions in the life of the Christian or the church. These include: 
 Conviction of sin. The Holy Spirit acts to convince the unredeemed person both of the sinfulness of their actions, and of their moral standing as sinners before God.[78] 
 Bringing to conversion. The action of the Holy Spirit is seen as an essential part of the bringing of the person to the Christian faith.[79] The new believer is "born again of the Spirit".[80] 
 Enabling the Christian life. The Holy Spirit is believed to dwell in the individual believers and enable them to live a righteous and faithful life.[79] 
 As a comforter or Paraclete, one who intercedes, or supports or acts as an advocate, particularly in times of trial. 
 Inspiration and interpretation of scripture. The Holy Spirit both inspires the writing of the scriptures and interprets them to the Christian and church.[81] 
 The Holy Spirit is also believed to be active especially in the life of Jesus Christ, enabling him to fulfil his work on earth. Particular actions of the Holy Spirit include: 
 Cause of his birth. According to the gospel accounts of the birth of Jesus, the "beginning of His incarnate existence", was due to the Holy Spirit.[82][83] 
 Empowerment of his ministry. The ministry of Jesus following his baptism (in which the Holy Spirit is described in the gospels as "descending on Him like a dove") is conducted in the power and at the direction of the Holy Spirit.[79] 
 Christians believe that the Holy Spirit gives 'gifts' to Christians. These gifts consist of specific abilities granted to the individual Christian.[79] They are frequently known by the Greek word for gift, Charisma, from which the term charismatic derives. The New Testament provides three different lists of such gifts which range from the supernatural (healing, prophecy, tongues) through those associated with specific callings (teaching) to those expected of all Christians in some degree (faith). Most consider these lists not to be exhaustive, and other have compiled their own lists. Saint Ambrose wrote of the Seven Gifts of the Holy Spirit poured out on a believer at baptism: 1. Spirit of Wisdom; 2. Spirit of Understanding; 3. Spirit of Counsel; 4. Spirit of Strength; 5. Spirit of Knowledge; 6. Spirit of Godliness; 7. Spirit of Holy Fear.[86] 
 It is over the nature and occurrence of these gifts, particularly the supernatural gifts (sometimes called charismatic gifts), that the greatest disagreement between Christians with regard to the Holy Spirit exists. 
 One view is that the supernatural gifts were a special dispensation for the apostolic ages, bestowed because of the unique conditions of the church at that time, and are extremely rarely bestowed in the present time.[87] This is the view of some in the Catholic Church[73] and many other mainstream Christian groups. The alternate view, espoused mainly by Pentecostal denominations and the charismatic movement, is that the absence of the supernatural gifts was due to the neglect of the Holy Spirit and his work by the church. Although some small groups, such as the Montanists, practiced the supernatural gifts they were rare until the growth of the Pentecostal movement in the late 19th century.[87] 
 Believers in the relevance of the supernatural gifts sometimes speak of a Baptism of the Holy Spirit or Filling of the Holy Spirit which the Christian needs to experience in order to receive those gifts. Many churches hold that the Baptism of the Holy Spirit is identical with conversion, and that all Christians are by definition baptized in the Holy Spirit.[87] 
 And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the darkness.And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day. Genesis 1: 3–5 
 The various authors of the Old and New Testament provide glimpses of their insight regarding cosmology. The cosmos was created by God by divine command, in the best-known and most complete account in the Bible, that of Genesis 1. 
 Within this broad understanding, however, there are a number of views regarding exactly how this doctrine ought to be interpreted. 
 Some Christians, particularly Young and Old Earth creationists, interpret Genesis as an accurate and literal account of creation. 
 Others may understand these to be, instead, spiritual insights more vaguely defined. 
 Roman Catholicism uses the phrase special creation to refer to the doctrine of immediate or special creation of each human soul. In 2004, the International Theological Commission, then under the presidency of Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, published a paper in which it accepts the current scientific accounts of the history of the universe commencing in the Big Bang about 15 billion years ago and of the evolution of all life on earth including humans from the micro organisms commencing about 4 billion years ago.[88] The Roman Catholic Church allows for both a literal and allegorical interpretation of Genesis, so as to allow for the possibility of Creation by means of an evolutionary process over great spans of time, otherwise known as theistic evolution.[dubious – discuss] It believes that the creation of the world is a work of God through the Logos, the Word (idea, intelligence, reason and logic): 
 "In the beginning was the Word...and the Word was God...all things were made through him, and without him was not anything made that was made." 
 The New Testament claims that God created everything by the eternal Word, Jesus Christ his beloved Son. In him 
 "all things were created, in heaven and on earth.. . all things were created through him and for him. He is before all things, and in him all things hold together."[89] 
 Christian anthropology is the study of humanity, especially as it relates to the divine. This theological anthropology refers to the study of the human ("anthropology") as it relates to God. It differs from the social science of anthropology, which primarily deals with the comparative study of the physical and social characteristics of humanity across times and places. 
 One aspect studies the innate nature or constitution of the human, known as the nature of mankind. It is concerned with the relationship between notions such as body, soul and spirit which together form a person, based on their descriptions in the Bible. There are three traditional views of the human constitution– trichotomism, dichotomism and monism (in the sense of anthropology).[90] 
 The semantic domain of Biblical soul is based on the Hebrew word nepes, which presumably means "breath" or "breathing being".[91] This word never means an immortal soul[92] or an incorporeal part of the human being[93] that can survive death of the body as the spirit of dead.[94] This word usually designates the person as a whole[95] or its physical life. In the Septuagint nepes is mostly translated as psyche (ψυχή) and, exceptionally, in the Book of Joshua as empneon (ἔμπνεον), that is "breathing being".[96] 
 The New Testament follows the terminology of the Septuagint, and thus uses the word psyche with the Hebrew semantic domain and not the Greek,[97] that is an invisible power (or ever more, for Platonists, immortal and immaterial) that gives life and motion to the body and is responsible for its attributes. 
 In Patristic thought, towards the end of the 2nd century psyche was understood in more a Greek than a Hebrew way, and it was contrasted with the body. In the 3rd century, with the influence of Origen, there was the establishing of the doctrine of the inherent immortality of the soul and its divine nature.[98] Origen also taught the transmigration of the souls and their preexistence, but these views were officially rejected in 553 in the Fifth Ecumenical Council. Inherent immortality of the soul was accepted among western and eastern theologians throughout the middle ages, and after the Reformation, as evidenced by the Westminster Confession. 
 Spirit 
 The spirit (Hebrew ruach, Greek πνεῦμα, pneuma, which can also mean "breath") is likewise an immaterial component. It is often used interchangeably with "soul", psyche, although trichotomists believe that the spirit is distinct from the soul. 
 "When Paul speaks of the pneuma of man he does not mean some higher principle within him or some special intellectual or spiritual faculty of his, but simply his self, and the only questions is whether the self is regarded in some particular aspect when it is called pneuma. In the first place, it apparently is regarded in the same way as when it is called psyche– viz. as the self that lives in man's attitude, in the orientation of his will."[99] 
 Body, Flesh 
 The body (Greek σῶμα soma) is the corporeal or physical aspect of a human being. Christians have traditionally believed that the body will be resurrected at the end of the age. 
 Flesh (Greek σάρξ, sarx) is usually considered synonymous with "body", referring to the corporeal aspect of a human being. The apostle Paul contrasts flesh and spirit in Romans 7–8. 
 The Bible teaches in the book of Genesis the humans were created by God. Some Christians believe that this must have involved a miraculous creative act, while others are comfortable with the idea that God worked through the evolutionary process. 
 The book of Genesis also teaches that human beings, male and female, were created in the image of God. The exact meaning of this has been debated throughout church history. 
 Christian anthropology has implications for beliefs about death and the afterlife. The Christian church has traditionally taught that the soul of each individual separates from the body at death, to be reunited at the resurrection. This is closely related to the doctrine of the immortality of the soul. For example, the Westminster Confession (chapter XXXII) states: 
 "The bodies of men, after death, return to dust, and see corruption: but their souls, which neither die nor sleep, having an immortal subsistence, immediately return to God who gave them" 
 The question then arises: where exactly does the disembodied soul "go" at death? Theologians refer to this subject as the intermediate state. The Old Testament speaks of a place called sheol where the spirits of the dead reside. In the New Testament, hades, the classical Greek realm of the dead, takes the place of sheol. In particular, Jesus teaches in Luke 16:19–31 (Lazarus and Dives) that hades consists of two separate "sections", one for the righteous and one for the unrighteous. His teaching is consistent with intertestamental Jewish thought on the subject.[100] 
 Fully developed Christian theology goes a step further; on the basis of such texts as Luke 23:43 and Philippians 1:23, it has traditionally been taught that the souls of the dead are received immediately either into heaven or hell, where they will experience a foretaste of their eternal destiny prior to the resurrection. (Roman Catholicism teaches a third possible location, Purgatory, though this is denied by Protestants and Eastern Orthodox.) 
 "the souls of the righteous, being then made perfect in holiness, are received into the highest heavens, where they behold the face of God, in light and glory, waiting for the full redemption of their bodies. And the souls of the wicked are cast into hell, where they remain in torments and utter darkness, reserved to the judgment of the great day." (Westminster Confession) 
 Some Christian groups which stress a monistic anthropology deny that the soul can exist consciously apart from the body. For example, the Seventh-day Adventist Church teaches that the intermediate state is an unconscious sleep; this teaching is informally known as "soul sleep". 
 Final state 
 In Christian belief, both the righteous and the unrighteous will be resurrected at the last judgment. The righteous will receive incorruptible, immortal bodies (1 Corinthians 15), while the unrighteous will be sent to hell. Traditionally, Christians have believed that hell will be a place of eternal physical and psychological punishment. In the last two centuries, annihilationism has become popular. 
 Its specific hierarchy differs slightly from the Hierarchy of Angels as it surrounds more military services, whereas the Hierarchy of angels is a division of angels into non-military services to God. 
 Cherubim are depicted as accompanying God's chariot-throne (Ps.80:1). Exodus 25:18–22 refers to two Cherub statues placed on top of the Ark of the Covenant, the two cherubim are usually interpreted as guarding the throne of God. Other guard-like duties include being posted in locations such as the gates of Eden (Gen.3:24). Cherubim were mythological winged bulls or other beasts that were part of ancient Near Eastern traditions.[101] 
 This angelic designation might be given to angels of various ranks. An example would be Raphael who is ranked variously as a Seraph, Cherub, and Archangel .[102] This is usually a result of conflicting schemes of hierarchies of angels. 
 It is not known how many angels there are but one figure given in Revelation 5:11 for the number of "many angels in a circle around the throne, as well as the living creatures and the elders" was "ten thousand times ten thousand", which would be 100 million. 
 In most of Christianity, a fallen angel is an angel who has been exiled or banished from Heaven. Often such banishment is a punishment for disobeying or rebelling against God (see War in Heaven). The best-known fallen angel is Lucifer. Lucifer is a name frequently given to Satan in Christian belief. This usage stems from a particular interpretation, as a reference to a fallen angel, of a passage in the Bible (Isaiah 14:3–20) that speaks of someone who is given the name of "Day Star" or "Morning Star" (in Latin, Lucifer) as fallen from heaven. The Greek etymological synonym of Lucifer, Φωσφόρος (Phosphoros, "light-bearer").[103][104] is used of the morning star in 2 Peter 1:19 and elsewhere with no reference to Satan. But Satan is called Lucifer in many writings later than the Bible, notably in Milton's Paradise Lost (7.131–134, among others), because, according to Milton, Satan was "brighter once amidst the host of Angels, than that star the stars among." 
 Allegedly, fallen angels are those which have committed one of the seven deadly sins. Therefore, are banished from heaven and suffer in hell for all eternity. Demons from hell would punish the fallen angel by ripping out their wings as a sign of insignificance and low rank. [105] 
 Christianity has taught Heaven as a place of eternal life, in that it is a shared plane to be attained by all the elect (rather than an abstract experience related to individual concepts of the ideal). The Christian Church has been divided over how people gain this eternal life. From the 16th to the late 19th century, Christendom was divided between the Catholic view, the Eastern Orthodox view, the Coptic view, the Jacobite view, the Abyssinian view and Protestant views. See also Christian denominations. 
 Heaven is the English name for a transcendental realm wherein human beings who have transcended human living live in an afterlife. in the Bible and in English, the term "heaven" may refer to the physical heavens, the sky or the seemingly endless expanse of the universe beyond, the traditional literal meaning of the term in English. 
 Christianity maintains that entry into Heaven awaits such time as, "When the form of this world has passed away." (*JPII) One view expressed in the Bible is that on the day Christ returns the righteous dead are resurrected first, and then those who are alive and judged righteous will be brought up to join them, to be taken to heaven. (I Thess 4:13–18) 
 Two related and often confused concepts of heaven in Christianity are better described as the "resurrection of the body", which is exclusively of biblical origin, as contrasted with the "immortality of the soul", which is also evident in the Greek tradition. In the first concept, the soul does not enter heaven until the last judgement or the "end of time" when it (along with the body) is resurrected and judged. In the second concept, the soul goes to a heaven on another plane such as the intermediate state immediately after death. These two concepts are generally combined in the doctrine of the double judgement where the soul is judged once at death and goes to a temporary heaven, while awaiting a second and final physical judgement at the end of the world.(*" JPII, also see eschatology, afterlife) 
 One popular medieval view of Heaven was that it existed as a physical place above the clouds and that God and the Angels were physically above, watching over man. Heaven as a physical place survived in the concept that it was located far out into space, and that the stars were "lights shining through from heaven". 
 Many of today's biblical scholars, such as N. T. Wright, in tracing the concept of Heaven back to its Jewish roots, see Earth and Heaven as overlapping or interlocking. Heaven is known as God's space, his dimension, and is not a place that can be reached by human technology. This belief states that Heaven is where God lives and reigns whilst being active and working alongside people on Earth. One day when God restores all things, Heaven and Earth will be forever combined into the New Heavens and New Earth of the World to Come. 
 Religions that teach about heaven differ on how (and if) one gets into it, typically in the afterlife. In most, entrance to Heaven is conditional on having lived a "good life" (within the terms of the spiritual system). A notable exception to this is the 'sola fide' belief of many mainstream Protestants, which teaches that one does not have to live a perfectly "good life," but that one must accept Jesus Christ as one's saviour, and then Jesus Christ will assume the guilt of one's sins; believers are believed to be forgiven regardless of any good or bad "works" one has participated in.[106] 
 Many religions state that those who do not go to heaven will go to a place "without the presence of God", Hell, which is eternal (see annihilationism). Some religions believe that other afterlives exist in addition to Heaven and Hell, such as Purgatory. One belief, universalism, believes that everyone will go to Heaven eventually, no matter what they have done or believed on earth. Some forms of Christianity believe Hell to be the termination of the soul. 
 Various saints have had visions of heaven (2 Corinthians 12:2–4). The Eastern Orthodox concept of life in heaven is described in one of the prayers for the dead: "...a place of light, a place of green pasture, a place of repose, whence all sickness, sorrow and sighing are fled away."[107] 
 The Church bases its belief in Heaven on some main biblical passages in the Hebrew and Christian Scriptures (Old and New Testaments) and collected church wisdom. Heaven is the Realm of the Blessed Trinity, the angels[108] and the saints.[109] 
 The essential joy of heaven is called the beatific vision, which is derived from the vision of God's essence. The soul rests perfectly in God, and does not, or cannot desire anything else than God. After the Last Judgment, when the soul is reunited with its body, the body participates in the happiness of the soul. It becomes incorruptible, glorious and perfect. Any physical defects the body may have laboured under are erased. Heaven is also known as paradise in some cases. The Great Gulf separates heaven from hell. 
 Upon dying, each soul goes to what is called "the particular judgement" where its own afterlife is decided (i.e. Heaven after Purgatory, straight to Heaven, or Hell.) This is different from "the general judgement" also known as "the Last judgement" which will occur when Christ returns to judge all the living and the dead. 
 The term Heaven (which differs from "The Kingdom of Heaven" see note below) is applied by the biblical authors to the realm in which God currently resides. Eternal life, by contrast, occurs in a renewed, unspoilt and perfect creation, which can be termed Heaven since God will choose to dwell there permanently with his people, as seen in Revelation 21:3. There will no longer be any separation between God and man. The believers themselves will exist in incorruptible, resurrected and new bodies; there will be no sickness, no death and no tears. Some teach that death itself is not a natural part of life, but was allowed to happen after Adam and Eve disobeyed God (see original sin) so that mankind would not live forever in a state of sin and thus a state of separation from God. 
 Many evangelicals understand this future life to be divided into two distinct periods: first, the Millennial Reign of Christ (the one thousand years) on this earth, referred to in Revelation 20:1–10; secondly, the New Heavens and New Earth, referred to in Revelation 21 and 22. This millennialism (or chiliasm) is a revival of a strong tradition in the Early Church[110] that was dismissed by Saint Augustine of Hippo and the Roman Catholic Church after him. 
 Not only will the believers spend eternity with God, they will also spend it with each other. John's vision recorded in Revelation describes a New Jerusalem which comes from Heaven to the New Earth, which is seen to be a symbolic reference to the people of God living in community with one another. 'Heaven' will be the place where life will be lived to the full, in the way that the designer planned, each believer 'loving the Lord their God with all their heart and with all their soul and with all their mind' and 'loving their neighbour as themselves' (adapted from Matthew 22:37–38, the Great Commandment)—a place of great joy, without the negative aspects of earthly life. See also World to Come. 
 Purgatory 
 Purgatory is the condition or temporary punishment[29] in which, it is believed, the souls of those who die in a state of grace are made ready for Heaven. This is a theological idea that has ancient roots and is well-attested in early Christian literature, while the poetic conception of purgatory as a geographically situated place is largely the creation of medieval Christian piety and imagination.[29] 
 The notion of purgatory is associated particularly with the Latin Rite of the Catholic Church (in the Eastern sui juris churches or rites it is a doctrine, though often without using the name "Purgatory"); Anglicans of the Anglo-Catholic tradition generally also hold to the belief. John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, believed in an intermediate state between death and the final judgment and in the possibility of "continuing to grow in holiness there."[111][112] The Eastern Orthodox Churches believe in the possibility of a change of situation for the souls of the dead through the prayers of the living and the offering of the Divine Liturgy,[113] and many Eastern Orthodox, especially among ascetics, hope and pray for a general apocatastasis.[114] A similar belief in at least the possibility of a final salvation for all is held by Mormonism.[115] Judaism also believes in the possibility of after-death purification[116] and may even use the word "purgatory" to present its understanding of the meaning of Gehenna.[117] However, the concept of soul "purification" may be explicitly denied in these other faith traditions. 
 Hell in Christian beliefs, is a place or a state in which the souls of the unsaved will suffer the consequences of sin. The Christian doctrine of Hell derives from the teaching of the New Testament, where Hell is typically described using the Greek words Gehenna or Tartarus. Unlike Hades, Sheol, or Purgatory it is eternal, and those damned to Hell are without hope. In the New Testament, it is described as the place or state of punishment after death or last judgment for those who have rejected Jesus.[118] In many classical and popular depictions it is also the abode of Satan and of Demons.[119] 
 Hell is generally defined as the eternal fate of unrepentant sinners after this life.[120] Hell's character is inferred from biblical teaching, which has often been understood literally.[120] Souls are said to pass into Hell by God's irrevocable judgment, either immediately after death (particular judgment) or in the general judgment.[120] Modern theologians generally describe Hell as the logical consequence of the soul using its free will to reject the will of God.[120] It is considered compatible with God's justice and mercy because God will not interfere with the soul's free choice.[120] 
 Only in the King James Version of the bible is the word "Hell" used to translate certain words, such as sheol (Hebrew) and both hades and Gehenna(Greek). All other translations reserve Hell only for use when Gehenna is mentioned. It is generally agreed that both sheol and hades do not typically refer to the place of eternal punishment, but to the underworld or temporary abode of the dead.[121] 
 Traditionally, the majority of Protestants have held that Hell will be a place of unending conscious torment, both physical and spiritual,[122] although some recent writers (such as C. S. Lewis[123] and J.P. Moreland[124]) have cast Hell in terms of "eternal separation" from God. Certain biblical texts have led some theologians to the conclusion that punishment in Hell, though eternal and irrevocable, will be proportional to the deeds of each soul (e.g. Matthew 10:15, Luke 12:46–48).[125] 
 Another area of debate is the fate of the unevangelized (i.e. those who have never had an opportunity to hear the Christian gospel), those who die in infancy, and the mentally disabled. Some Protestants agree with Augustine that people in these categories will be damned to Hell for original sin, while others believe that God will make an exception in these cases.[122] 
 A "significant minority" believe in the doctrine of conditional immortality,[126] which teaches that those sent to Hell will not experience eternal conscious punishment, but instead will be extinguished or annihilated after a period of "limited conscious punishment".[127] Prominent evangelical theologians who have adopted conditionalist beliefs include John Wenham, Edward Fudge, Clark Pinnock and John Stott (although the latter has described himself as an "agnostic" on the issue of annihilationism).[122] Conditionalists typically reject the traditional concept of the immortality of the soul. 
 Theodicy can be said to be defense of God's goodness and omnipotence in view of the existence of evil. Specifically, Theodicy is a specific branch of theology and philosophy which attempts to reconcile belief in God with the perceived existence of evil.[128] As such, theodicy can be said to attempt to justify the behaviour of God (at least insofar as God allows evil). 
 Responses to the problem of evil have sometimes been classified as defenses or theodicies. However, authors disagree on the exact definitions.[129][130][131] Generally, a defense attempts to show that there is no logical incompatibility between the existence of evil and the existence of God. A defense need not argue that this is a probable or plausible explanation, only that the defense is logically possible. A defense attempts to answer the logical problem of evil. 
 A theodicy, on the other hand, is a more ambitious attempt to provide a plausible justification for the existence of evil. A theodicy attempts to answer the evidential problem of evil.[130] Richard Swinburne maintains that it does not make sense to assume there are greater goods, unless we know what they are, i.e., we have a successful theodicy.[132] 
 As an example, some authors see arguments including demons or the fall of man as not logically impossible but not very plausible considering our knowledge about the world. Thus they are seen as defenses but not good theodicies.[130] C. S. Lewis writes in his book The Problem of Pain: 
 We can, perhaps, conceive of a world in which God corrected the results of this abuse of free will by His creatures at every moment: so that a wooden beam became soft as grass when it was used as a weapon, and the air refused to obey me if I attempted to set up in it the sound waves that carry lies or insults. But such a world would be one in which wrong actions were impossible, and in which, therefore, freedom of the will would be void; nay, if the principle were carried out to its logical conclusion, evil thoughts would be impossible, for the cerebral matter which we use in thinking would refuse its task when we attempted to frame them.[133] 
 Another possible answer is that the world is corrupted due to the sin of mankind. Some answer that because of sin, the world has fallen from the grace of God, and is not perfect. Therefore, evils and imperfections persist because the world is fallen.[134] William A. Dembski argues that the effects of Adam's sin recorded in the Book of Genesis were 'back-dated' by God, and hence applied to the earlier history of the universe.[135] 
 Evil is sometimes seen as a test or trial for humans. Irenaeus of Lyons and more recently John Hick have argued that evil and suffering are necessary for spiritual growth. This is often combined with the free will argument by arguing that such spiritual growth requires free will decisions. A problem with this is that many evils do not seem to cause any kind of spiritual growth, or even permit it, as when a child is abused from birth and becomes, seemingly inevitably, a brutal adult. 
 The problem of evil is often phrased in the form: Why do bad things happen to good people?. Christianity teach that all people are inherently sinful due to the fall of man and original sin; for example, Calvinist theology follows a doctrine called federal headship, which argues that the first man, Adam, was the legal representative of the entire human race. A counterargument to the basic version of this principle is that an omniscient God would have predicted this, when he created the world, and an omnipotent God could have prevented it. 
 The Book of Isaiah clearly claims that God is the source of at least some natural disasters, but Isaiah doesn't attempt to explain the motivation behind the creation of evil.[136] In contrast, the Book of Job is one of the most widely known formulations of the problem of evil in Western thought. In it, Satan challenges God regarding his servant Job, claiming that Job only serves God for the blessings and protection that he receives from him. God allows Satan to plague Job and his family in a number of ways, with the limitation that Satan may not take Job's life (but his children are killed). Job discusses this with three friends and questions God regarding his suffering which he finds to be unjust. God responds in a speech and then more than restores Job's prior health, wealth, and gives him new children. 
 Bart D. Ehrman argues that different parts of the Bible give different answers. One example is evil as punishment for sin or as a consequence of sin. Ehrman writes that this seems to be based on some notion of free will although this argument is never explicitly mentioned in the Bible. Another argument is that suffering ultimately achieves a greater good, possibly for persons other than the sufferer, that would not have been possible otherwise. The Book of Job offers two different answers: suffering is a test, and you will be rewarded later for passing it; another that God in his might chooses not to reveal his reasons. Ecclesiastes sees suffering as beyond human abilities to comprehend. Apocalyptic parts, including the New Testament, see suffering as due to cosmic evil forces, that God for mysterious reasons has given power over the world, but which will soon be defeated and things will be set right.[137] 
 The Greek word in the New Testament that is translated in English as "sin" is hamartia, which literally means missing the target. 1 John 3:4 states: "Everyone who sins breaks the law; in fact, sin is lawlessness". Jesus clarified the law by defining its foundation: "Jesus replied: 'Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.' This is the first and greatest commandment. And the second is like it: 'Love your neighbor as yourself.' All the Law and the Prophets hang on these two commandments." (Matthew 22:36–40) 
 Hamartiology (Greek: ἁμαρτία, hamartia, "missing the mark," "sin," + -λογια, -logia, "sayings" or "discourse") is the branch of Christian theology, more specifically, systematic theology, which is the study of sin with a view to articulating a doctrine of it. 
 Substantial branches of hamartiological understanding subscribe to the doctrine of original sin, which was taught by the Apostle Paul in Romans 5:12–19 and popularized by Saint Augustine. He taught that all the descendants of Adam and Eve are guilty of Adam's sin without their own personal choice.[138] 
 In contrast, Pelagius argued that humans enter life as essentially tabulae rasae. The fall that occurred when Adam and Eve disobeyed God was held by his group to have affected humankind only minimally. But few theologians continue to hold this hamartiological viewpoint. 
 A third branch of thinking takes an intermediate position, arguing that after the fall of Adam and Eve, humans are born impacted by sin such that they have very decided tendencies toward sinning (which by personal choice all accountable humans but Jesus soon choose to indulge). 
 The degree to which a Christian believes humanity is impacted by either a literal or metaphorical "fall" determines their understanding of related theological concepts like salvation, justification, and sanctification. 
 Christian views on sin are mostly understood as legal infraction or contract violation, and so salvation tends to be viewed in legal terms, similar to Jewish thinking. 
 A Sistine Chapel fresco depicts the expulsion of Adam and Eve from the garden of Eden for their sin of eating from the fruit of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. 
 In religion, sin is the concept of acts that violate a rule of God. The term sin may also refer to the state of having committed such a violation. Commonly, the moral code of conduct is decreed by a divine entity, i.e. Divine law. 
 Sin is often used to mean an action that is prohibited or considered wrong; in some religions (notably some sects of Christianity), sin can refer not only to physical actions taken, but also to thoughts and internalized motivations and feelings. Colloquially, any thought, word, or act considered immoral, shameful, harmful, or alienating might be termed "sinful". 
 An elementary concept of "sin" regards such acts and elements of Earthly living that one cannot take with them into transcendental living. Food, for example is not of transcendental living and therefore its excessive savoring is considered a sin. A more developed concept of "sin" deals with a distinction between sins of death (mortal sin) and the sins of human living (venial sin). In that context, mortal sins are said to have the dire consequence of mortal penalty, while sins of living (food, casual or informal sexuality, play, inebriation) may be regarded as essential spice for transcendental living, even though these may be destructive in the context of human living (obesity, infidelity). 
 Common ideas surrounding sin in various religions include: 
 Punishment for sins, from other people, from God either in life or in afterlife, or from the Universe in general. 
 The question of whether an act must be intentional to be sinful. 
 The idea that one's conscience should produce guilt for a conscious act of sin. 
 A scheme for determining the seriousness of the sin. 
 Repentance from (expressing regret for and determining not to commit) sin, and atonement (repayment) for past deeds. 
 In Western Christianity, "sin is lawlessness" (1 John 3:4) and so salvation tends to be understood in legal terms, similar to Jewish law. Sin alienates the sinner from God. It has damaged, and completely severed, the relationship of humanity to God. That relationship can only be restored through acceptance of Jesus Christ and his death on the cross as a sacrifice for mankind's sin (see Salvation and Substitutionary atonement). 
 In Eastern Christianity, sin is viewed in terms of its effects on relationships, both among people and between people and God. Sin is seen as the refusal to follow God's plan, and the desire to be like God and thus in direct opposition to him (see the account of Adam and Eve in the Book of Genesis). To sin is to want control of one's destiny in opposition to the will of God, to do some rigid beliefs. 
 In the Russian variant of Eastern Orthodox Christianity, sin sometimes is regarded as any mistake made by people in their life. From this point of view every person is sinful because every person makes mistakes during his life. When person accuses others in sins he always must remember that he is also sinner and so he must have mercy for others remembering that God is also merciful to him and to all humanity. 
 The fall of man or simply the fall refers in Christian doctrine to the transition of the first humans from a state of innocent obedience to God, to a state of guilty disobedience to God. In the Book of Genesis chapter 2, Adam and Eve live at first with God in a paradise, but are then deceived or tempted by the serpent to eat fruit from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, which had been forbidden to them by God. After doing so they become ashamed of their nakedness, and God consequently expelled them from paradise. The fall is not mentioned by name in the Bible, but the story of disobedience and expulsion is recounted in both Testaments in different ways. The Fall can refer to the wider theological inferences for all humankind as a consequence of Eve and Adam's original sin. Examples include the teachings of Paul in Romans 5:12–19 and 1 Cor. 15:21–22. 
 Some Christian denominations believe the fall corrupted the entire natural world, including human nature, causing people to be born into original sin, a state from which they cannot attain eternal life without the gracious intervention of God. Protestants hold that Jesus' death was a "ransom" by which humanity was offered freedom from the sin acquired at the fall. In other religions, such as Judaism, Islam, and Gnosticism, the term "the fall" is not recognized and varying interpretations of the Eden narrative are presented. 
 Christianity interprets the fall in a number of ways. Traditional Christian theology accepts the teaching of St Paul in his letter to the Romans[139][better source needed] "For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God" and of St John's Gospel that "God so loved the world that he sent his only son (Jesus Christ) that whoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life".[John 3:16][better source needed] 
 The doctrine of original sin, as articulated by Augustine of Hippo's interpretation of Paul of Tarsus, provides that the fall caused a fundamental change in human nature, so that all descendants of Adam are born in sin, and can only be redeemed by divine grace. Sacrifice was the only means by which humanity could be redeemed after the fall. Jesus, who was without sin, died on the cross as the ultimate redemption for the sin of humankind. 
 Thus, the moment Adam and Eve ate the fruit from the tree—which God had commanded them not to do—sinful death was born; it was an act of disobedience, thinking they could become like gods, that was the sin. Since Adam was the head of the human race, he is held responsible for the evil that took place, for which reason the fall of man is referred to as the "sin of Adam". This sin caused Adam and his descendants to lose unrestricted access to God Himself. The years of life were limited. "Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned" (Romans 5:12). In Christian theology, the death of Jesus on the cross is the atonement to the sin of Adam. "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Corinthians 15:22). As a result of that act of Christ, all who put their trust in Christ alone now have unrestricted access to God through prayer and in presence. 
 Original sin, which Eastern Christians usually refer to as ancestral sin,[140] is, according to a doctrine proposed in Christian theology, humanity's state of sin resulting from the fall of man.[141] This condition has been characterized in many ways, ranging from something as insignificant as a slight deficiency, or a tendency toward sin yet without collective guilt, referred to as a "sin nature," to something as drastic as total depravity or automatic guilt by all humans through collective guilt.[142] 
 Augustine of Hippo wrote that original sin is transmitted by concupiscence and enfeebles freedom of the will without destroying it.[34] 
 The Apostolic Fathers and the Apologists mostly dealt with topics other than original sin.[34] The doctrine of original sin was first developed in 2nd-century Bishop of Lyon Irenaeus's struggle against Gnosticism.[34] The Greek Fathers emphasized the cosmic dimension of the fall, namely that since Adam human beings are born into a fallen world, but held fast to belief that man, though fallen, is free.[34] It was in the West that precise definition of the doctrine arose.[34] Augustine of Hippo taught that original sin was both an act of foolishness (insipientia) and of pride and disobedience to the God of Adam and Eve. He thought it was a most subtle job to discern what came first: self-centeredness or failure in seeing truth.[143] The sin would not have taken place, if satan hadn't sown into their senses "the root of evil" (radix Mali).[144] The sin of Adam and Eve wounded their nature, affecting human intelligence and will, as well as affections and desires, including sexual desire. The consequences of the fall were transmitted to their descendants in the form of concupiscence, which is a metaphysical term, and not a psychological one. Thomas Aquinas explained Augustine's doctrine pointing out that the libido (concupiscence), which makes the original sin pass from parents to children, is not a libido actualis, i.e. sexual lust, but libido habitualis, i.e. a wound of the whole of human nature.[145] Augustine insisted that concupiscence was not a being but bad quality, the privation of good or a wound.[146] The bishop of Hippo admitted that sexual concupiscence (libido) might have been present in the perfect human nature in the paradise, and that only later it had become disobedient to human will as a result of the first couple's disobedience to God's will in the original sin.[147] The original sin have made humanity a massa damnata[34] (mass of perdition, condemned crowd). In Augustine's view (termed "Realism"), all of humanity was really present in Adam when he sinned, and therefore all have sinned. Original sin, according to Augustine, consists of the guilt of Adam which all humans inherit. As sinners, humans are utterly depraved in nature, lack the freedom to do good, and cannot respond to the will of God without divine grace. Grace is irresistible, results in conversion, and leads to perseverance.[148] 
 Augustine's formulation of original sin was popular among Protestant reformers, such as Martin Luther and John Calvin, and also, within Roman Catholicism, in the Jansenist movement, but this movement was declared heretical by the Catholic Church.[149] There are wide-ranging disagreements among Christian groups as to the exact understanding of the doctrine about a state of sinfulness or absence of holiness affecting all humans, even children, with some Christian groups denying it altogether. 
 The notion of original sin as interpreted by Augustine of Hippo was affirmed by the Protestant Reformer John Calvin. Calvin believed that humans inherit Adamic guilt and are in a state of sin from the moment of conception. This inherently sinful nature (the basis for the Calvinistic doctrine of "total depravity") results in a complete alienation from God and the total inability of humans to achieve reconciliation with God based on their own abilities. Not only do individuals inherit a sinful nature due to Adam's fall, but since he was the federal head and representative of the human race, all whom he represented inherit the guilt of his sin by imputation. 
 Total depravity (also called absolute inability and total corruption) is a theological doctrine that derives from the Augustinian concept of original sin. It is the teaching that, as a consequence of the fall of man, every person born into the world is enslaved to the service of sin and, apart from the efficacious or prevenient grace of God, is utterly unable to choose to follow God or choose to accept salvation as it is freely offered. 
 Total depravity is the fallen state of man as a result of original sin. The doctrine of total depravity asserts that people are by nature not inclined or even able to love God wholly with heart, mind, and strength, but rather all are inclined by nature to serve their own will and desires and to reject the rule of God. Even religion and philanthropy are wicked to God to the extent that these originate from a human imagination, passion, and will and are not done to the glory of God. Therefore, in Reformed theology, if God is to save anyone He must predestine, call, elect individuals to salvation since fallen man does not want to, indeed is incapable of choosing God.[154] 
 Total depravity does not mean, however, that people are as evil as possible. Rather, it means that even the good which a person may intend is faulty in its premise, false in its motive, and weak in its implementation; and there is no mere refinement of natural capacities that can correct this condition. Thus, even acts of generosity and altruism are in fact egoist acts in disguise. All good, consequently, is derived from God alone, and in no way through man.[155] 
 Calvinism 
 Lutheranism 
 Arminianism 
 For Calvin, in Total Depravity[156] humanity possesses "free will,"[157] but it is in bondage to sin,[158] until it is "transformed."[159] 
 For Luther, in Total Depravity[160][161] humanity possesses free-will/free choice in regard to "goods and possessions," but regarding "salvation or damnation" people are in bondage either to God or Satan."[162] 
 For Arminius, in Depravity[163] humanity possesses freedom from necessity, but not "freedom from sin" unless enabled by "prevenient grace."[164] 
 Christian soteriology is the branch of Christian theology that deals with one's salvation.[165] It is derived from the Greek sōtērion (salvation) (from sōtēr savior, preserver) + English -logy.[166] 
 Atonement is a doctrine that describes how human beings can be reconciled to God. In Christian theology the atonement refers to the forgiving or pardoning of one's sin through the death of Jesus Christ by crucifixion, which made possible the reconciliation between God and creation. Within Christianity there are three main theories for how such atonement might work: the ransom theory, the satisfaction theory and the moral influence theory. Christian soteriology is unlike and not to be confused with collective salvation. 
 Christian soteriology traditionally focuses on how God ends the separation people have from him due to sin by reconciling them with himself. (Rom. 5:10–11). Many Christians believe they receive the forgiveness of sins (Acts 2:38), life (Rom. 8:11), and salvation (1 Thess. 5:9) bought by Jesus through his innocent suffering, death, and resurrection from the dead three days later (Matt. 28). 
 Christ's death, resurrection, ascension, and sending of the Holy Spirit, is called The Paschal Mystery. Christ's human birth is called the Incarnation. Either or both are considered in different versions of soteriology. 
 While not neglecting the Paschal Mystery, many Christians believe salvation is brought through the Incarnation itself, in which God took on human nature so that humans could partake in the divine nature (2 Peter 1.4). As St. Athanasius put it, God became human so that we might become divine (St. Athanasius, De inc. 54, 3: PG 25, 192B.). This grace in Christ (1 Cor. 1:4) is received as a gift of God that cannot be merited by works done prior to one's conversion to Christianity (Eph. 2:8–9), which is brought about by hearing God's Word (Rom. 10:17) and harkening to it. This involves accepting Jesus Christ as the personal saviour and Lord over one's life. 
 Protestant teaching, originating with Martin Luther, teaches that salvation is received by grace alone and that one's sole necessary response to this grace is faith alone. Older Christian teaching, as found in Catholic and Orthodox theology, is that salvation is received by grace alone, but that one's necessary response to this grace comprises both faith and works (James 2:24, 26; Rom 2:6–7; Gal 5:6). 
 Human beings exists because God wanted to share His life with them. In this sense, every human being is God's child. In a fuller sense, to come to salvation is to be reconciled to God through Christ and to be united with His divine Essence via Theosis in the beatific vision of the Godhead. The graces of Christ's passion, death, and resurrection are found in the seven sacraments of the Catholic Church. 
 Original Sin:[160] Humanity possesses free will in regard to "goods and possessions", but is sinful by nature and unable to contribute to its own salvation.[171][172][173] 
 Ecclesiology (from Greek ἐκκλησίᾱ, ekklēsiā, "congregation, church"; and -λογία, -logia) is the study of the theological understanding of the Christian church, including the institutional structure, sacraments and practices (especially the worship of God) thereof. Specific areas of concern include the church's role in salvation, its origin, its relationship to the historical Christ, its discipline, its destiny, and its leadership. Ecclesiology is, therefore, the study of the church as a thing in, and of, itself. 
 Different ecclesiologies give shape to very different institutions. Thus, in addition to describing a broad discipline of theology, ecclesiology may be used in the specific sense of a particular church or denomination's character, self-described or otherwise. This is the sense of the word in such phrases as Roman Catholic ecclesiology, Lutheran ecclesiology, and ecumenical ecclesiology. 
 Issues addressed by ecclesiology 
 Ecclesiology asks the questions: 
 Who is the Church? Is it a visible or earthly corporation or a unified, visible society—a "church" in the sense of a specific denomination or institution, for instance? Or is it the body of all believing Christians (see invisible church) regardless of their denominational differences and disunity? What is the relationship between living Christians and departed Christians (the "cloud of witnesses")– do they (those on Earth and those in Heaven) constitute together the Church? 
 Must one join a church? That is, what is the role of corporate worship in the spiritual lives of believers? Is it in fact necessary? Can salvation be found outside of formal membership in a given faith community, and what constitutes "membership?" (Baptism? Formal acceptance of a creed? Regular participation?) 
 What is the authority of the Church? Who gets to interpret the doctrines of the Church? Is the organizational structure itself, either in a single corporate body, or generally within the range of formal church structures, an independent vehicle of revelation or of God's grace? Or is the Church's authority instead dependent on and derivative of a separate and prior divine revelation external to the organization, with individual institutions being "the Church" only to the extent that they teach this message? For example, is the Bible a written part of a wider revelation entrusted to the Church as faith community, and therefore to be interpreted within that context? Or is the Bible the revelation itself, and the Church is to be defined as a group of people who claim adherence to it? 
 What does the Church do? What are the sacraments, divine ordinances, and liturgies, in the context of the Church, and are they part of the Church's mission to preach the Gospel? What is the comparative emphasis and relationship between worship service, spiritual formation, and mission, and is the Church's role to create disciples of Christ or some other function? Is the Eucharist the defining element of the rest of the sacramental system and the Church itself, or is it secondary to the act of preaching? Is the Church to be understood as the vehicle for salvation, or the salvific presence in the world, or as a community of those already "saved?" 
 How should the Church be governed? What was the mission and authority of the Apostles, and is this handed down through the sacraments today? What are the proper methods of choosing clergy such as bishops and priests, and what is their role within the context of the Church? Is an ordained clergy necessary? * Who are the leaders of a church? Must there be a policy-making board of "leaders" within a church and what are the qualifications for this position, and by what process do these members become official, ordained "leaders"? Must leaders and clergy be "ordained," and is this possible only by those who have been ordained by others? 
 Ecclesiastical polity is the operational and governance structure of a church or Christian denomination. It also denotes the ministerial structure of the church and the authority relationships between churches. Polity is closely related to Ecclesiology, the study of doctrine and theology relating to church organization. 
 Issues of church governance appear in the first chapters of the Acts of the Apostles; the first act recorded after the ascension is the election of Matthias to replace Judas Iscariot. Over the years a system of episcopal polity developed. 
 Episcopal polity is used in several closely related senses. Most commonly it refers to the field of church governance in the abstract, but it also can refer to the governance of a particular Christian body. In this sense it is used as a term in civil law. "Polity" is sometimes used as a shorthand for the church governance structure itself. 
 Though each church or denomination has its own characteristic structure, there are three general types of polity. 
 Churches having episcopal polity are governed by bishops. The title bishop comes from the Greek word episkopos, which literally translates into overseer.[195] In regard to Catholicism, bishops have authority over the diocese, which is both sacramental and political; as well as performing ordinations, confirmations, and consecrations, the bishop supervises the clergy of the diocese and represents the diocese both secularly and in the hierarchy of church governance. 
 Bishops in this system may be subject to higher ranking bishops (variously called archbishops, metropolitans or patriarchs, depending upon the tradition; see also Bishop for further explanation of the varieties of bishops.) They also meet in councils or synods. These synods, subject to presidency by higher ranking bishops, may govern the dioceses which are represented in the council, though the synod may also be purely advisory. 
 Note that the presence of the office of "bishop" within a church is not proof of episcopal polity. For example, in Mormonism, the "bishop" occupies the office that in an Anglican church would be occupied by a priest. 
 Also, episcopal polity is not usually a simple chain of command. Instead, some authority may be held, not only by synods and colleges of bishops, but by lay and clerical councils. Further, patterns of authority are subject to a wide variety of historical rights and honors which may cut across simple lines of authority. 
 Many Reformed churches, notably those in the Presbyterian and Continental Reformed traditions, are governed by a hierarchy of councils. The lowest level council governs a single local church and is called the session or consistory; its members are called elders. The minister of the church (sometimes referred to as a teaching elder) is a member of and presides over the session; lay representatives (ruling elders or, informally, just elders) are elected by the congregation. The session sends representatives to the next level higher council, called the presbytery or classis. In some Presbyterian churches there are higher level councils (synods or general assemblies). Each council has authority over its constituents, and the representatives at each level are expected to use their own judgment. Hence higher level councils act as courts of appeal for church trials and disputes, and it is not uncommon to see rulings and decisions overturned. 
 Presbyterian polity is, of course, the characteristic governance of Presbyterian churches, and also of churches in the Continental Reformed tradition. Elements of presbyterian polity are also found in other churches. For example, in the Episcopal Church in the United States of America governance by bishops is paralleled by a system of deputies, who are lay and clerical representatives elected by parishes and, at the national level, by the dioceses. Legislation in the general convention requires the separate consent of the bishops and of the deputies. 
 Note that, in episcopal polity, a presbyter refers to a priest. 
 Congregationalist polity dispenses with titled positions such as bishop as a requirement of church structure. The local congregation rules itself, though local leaders and councils may be appointed. 
 Members may be sent from the congregation to associations that are sometimes identified with the church bodies formed by Lutherans, Presbyterians, Anglicans, and other non-congregational Protestants. The similarity is deceptive, however, because the congregationalist associations do not exercise control over their members (other than ending their membership in the association). Many congregationalist churches are completely independent in principle. One major exception is Ordination, where even congregationalist churches often invite members of the vicinage or association to ordain their called pastor. 
 It is a principle of congregationalism that ministers do not govern congregations by themselves. They may preside over the congregation, but it is the congregation which exerts its authority in the end. 
 Congregational polity is sometimes called "Baptist polity", as it is the characteristic polity of Baptist churches. 
 A sacrament, as defined in Hexam's Concise Dictionary of Religion, is what Roman Catholics believe to be "a rite in which God is uniquely active." Augustine of Hippo defined a Christian sacrament as "a visible sign of an invisible reality." The Anglican Book of Common Prayer speaks of them as "an outward and visible sign of an inward and invisible Grace." Examples of sacraments would be Baptism and the Eucharist."[196] Therefore a sacrament is a religious symbol or often a rite which conveys divine grace, blessing, or sanctity upon the believer who participates in it, or a tangible symbol which represents an intangible reality. As defined above, an example would be baptism in water, representing (and conveying) the grace of the gift of the Holy Spirit, the Forgiveness of Sins, and membership into the Church. Anointing with holy anointing oil is another example which is often synonymous with receiving the Holy Spirit and salvation. Another way of looking at Sacraments is that they are an external and physical sign of the conferral of Sanctifying Grace.[197] 
 Throughout the Christian faith, views concerning which rites are sacramental, that is conferring sanctifying grace, and what it means for an external act to be sacramental vary widely. Other religious traditions also have what might be called "sacraments" in a sense, though not necessarily according to the Christian meaning of the term. 
 General definitions and terms 
 In the majority of Western Christianity, the generally accepted definition of a sacrament is that it is an outward sign that conveys spiritual grace through Christ. Christian churches, denominations, and sects are divided regarding the number and operation of the sacraments. Sacraments are generally held to have been instituted by Jesus Christ, although in some cases this point is debated. They are usually administered by the clergy to a recipient or recipients, and are generally understood to involve visible and invisible components. The invisible component (manifested inwardly) is understood to be brought about by the action of the Holy Spirit, God's grace working in the sacrament's participants, while the visible (or outward) component entails the use of such things as water, oil, and bread and wine that is blessed or consecrated; the laying-on-of-hands; or a particularly significant covenant that is marked by a public benediction (such as with marriage or absolution of sin in the reconciliation of a penitent). 
 The Orthodox Churches (Eastern and Oriental) typically do not limit the number of sacraments, viewing all encounters with reality in life as sacramental in some sense, and their acknowledgement of the number of sacraments at seven as an innovation of convenience not found in the Church Fathers. It came into use, although infrequently, later on from later encounters with the West and its Sacramental Theology.[198] Other denominations and traditions, both in eastern and western Christianity may affirm only Baptism and Eucharist as sacraments, these include many of the Protestant denominations and some of the Old Believers in the Orthodox communion, some of whom reject all sacraments except Baptism. 
 Since some post-Reformation denominations do not regard clergy as having a classically sacerdotal or priestly function, they avoid the term "sacrament," preferring the terms "sacerdotal function," "ordinance," or "tradition." This belief invests the efficacy of the ordinance in the obedience and participation of the believer and the witness of the presiding minister and the congregation. This view stems from a highly developed concept of the priesthood of all believers. In this sense, the believer himself or herself performs the sacerdotal role[citation needed]. 
 Eucharist, also called Communion, or the Lord's Supper, and other names, is a Christian sacrament or ordinance, generally considered to be a re-enactment of the Last Supper, the final meal that Jesus Christ shared with his disciples before his arrest and eventual crucifixion. The consecration of bread and a cup within the rite recalls the moment at the Last Supper when Jesus gave his disciples bread, saying, "This is my body", and wine, saying, "This is my blood".[29][199] 
 There are different interpretations of the significance of the Eucharist, but "there is more of a consensus among Christians about the meaning of the Eucharist than would appear from the confessional debates over the sacramental presence, the effects of the Eucharist, and the proper auspices under which it may be celebrated."[200] 
 The phrase "the Eucharist" may refer not only to the rite but also to the consecrated bread (leavened or unleavened) and wine (or, in some Protestant denominations, unfermented grape juice) used in the rite,[201] and, in this sense, communicants may speak of "receiving the Eucharist", as well as "celebrating the Eucharist". 
 Eucharist is from Greek εὐχαριστία (eucharistia), meaning thanksgiving. The verb εὐχαριστῶ, the usual word for "to thank" in the Septuagint and the New Testament, is found in the major texts concerning the Lord's Supper, including the earliest: 
 For I received from the Lord what I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus on the night when he was betrayed took bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke it, and said, "This is my body which is for you. Do this in remembrance of me." (1 Corinthians 11:23–24) 
 The Lord's Supper (Κυριακὸν δεῖπνον) derives from 1 Corinthians 11:20–21. 
 When you come together, it is not the Lord's Supper you eat, for as you eat, each of you goes ahead without waiting for anybody else. One remains hungry, another gets drunk. 
 Communion is a translation; other translations are "participation", "sharing", "fellowship"[202] of the Greek κοινωνία (koinōnía) in 1 Corinthians 10:16. The King James Version has 
 The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?[203] 
 In his First Epistle to the Corinthians (c. 54–55), Paul the Apostle gives the earliest recorded description of Jesus' Last Supper: "The Lord Jesus on the night when he was betrayed took bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke it, and said, 'This is my body which is for you. Do this in remembrance of me.' In the same way also the cup, after supper, saying, 'This cup is the new covenant in my blood. Do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me'."[206] 
 The synoptic gospels, first Mark,[207] and then Matthew[208] and Luke,[209] depict Jesus as presiding over the Last Supper. References to Jesus' body and blood foreshadow his crucifixion, and he identifies them as a new covenant.[210] In the gospel of John, the account of the Last Supper has no mention of Jesus taking bread and wine and speaking of them as his body and blood; instead it recounts his humble act of washing the disciples' feet, the prophecy of the betrayal, which set in motion the events that would lead to the cross, and his long discourse in response to some questions posed by his followers, in which he went on to speak of the importance of the unity of the disciples with him and each other.[210][211] 
 The expression The Lord's Supper, derived from St. Paul's usage in 1 Corinthians 11:17–34, may have originally referred to the Agape feast, the shared communal meal with which the Eucharist was originally associated.[212] The Agape feast is mentioned in Jude 12. But The Lord's Supper is now commonly used in reference to a celebration involving no food other than the sacramental bread and wine. 
 The Didache (Greek: teaching) is an early Church order, including, among other features, instructions for baptism and the Eucharist. Most scholars date it to the early 2nd century,[213] and distinguish in it two separate Eucharistic traditions, the earlier tradition in chapter 10 and the later one preceding it in chapter 9.[214] The Eucharist is mentioned again in chapter 14. 
 Ignatius of Antioch, one of the Apostolic Fathers and a direct disciple of the Apostle John, mentions the Eucharist as "the flesh of our Saviour Jesus Christ",[215] and Justin Martyr speaks of it as more than a meal: "the food over which the prayer of thanksgiving, the word received from Christ, has been said ... is the flesh and blood of this Jesus who became flesh ... and the deacons carry some to those who are absent."[216] 
 Many Christian denominations classify the Eucharist as a sacrament.[217] Some Protestants prefer to call it an ordinance, viewing it not as a specific channel of divine grace but as an expression of faith and of obedience to Christ. 
 Most Christians, even those who deny that there is any real change in the elements used, recognize a special presence of Christ in this rite, though they differ about exactly how, where, and when Christ is present.[218] Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy teach that the consecrated elements truly become the body and blood of Jesus Christ. Transubstantiation is the metaphysical explanation given by Roman Catholics as to how this transformation occurs. Lutherans believe that the body and blood of Jesus are present "in, with and under" the forms of bread and wine, a concept known as the sacramental union. The Reformed churches, following the teachings of John Calvin, believe in a spiritual (or "pneumatic") real presence of Christ by the power of the Holy Spirit and received by faith. Anglicans adhere to a range of views although the Anglican church officially teaches the real presence. Some Christians reject the concept of the real presence, believing that the Eucharist is only a memorial of the death of Christ. 
 The Baptism, Eucharist and Ministry document of the World Council of Churches, attempting to present the common understanding of the Eucharist on the part of the generality of Christians, describes it as "essentially the sacrament of the gift which God makes to us in Christ through the power of the Holy Spirit", "Thanksgiving to the Father", "Anamnesis or Memorial of Christ", "the sacrament of the unique sacrifice of Christ, who ever lives to make intercession for us", "the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, the sacrament of his real presence", "Invocation of the Spirit", "Communion of the Faithful", and "Meal of the Kingdom". 
 Eschatology (derived from the Greek roots ἔσχατος "last" and λογία "discourse," "study") is the study of the end of things, whether the end of an individual life, the end of the age, or the end of the world. Broadly speaking, it is the study of the destiny of man as revealed in the Bible. 
 Eschatology is concerned with the afterlife, beginning with death and the personal judgment which follows the death of the individual, and which is followed by the destination of heaven or hell. (In Catholic theology, heaven is sometimes preceded by purgatory.) Eschatology also concerns itself with events which are said to happen at the end of this age: the return of Jesus, the resurrection of the dead, the Rapture, the Tribulation, and following these things, the Millennium, or thousand years of peace, which has been interpreted both literally and symbolically. Finally, eschatology concerns itself with the end of the world and its associated events: the Last Judgment; the banishment of Death, Hades, and Satan and his followers to the Lake of Fire; and the creation of a new heaven and earth. Millenarianists, Seventh Day Adventists, Jehovah's Witnesses, and other recently founded sects have been influential in the modern development of these doctrines, though their roots are biblical. 
 Eschatology is an ancient branch of study in Christian theology, with study of the "last things" and the Second Coming of Christ first touched on by Ignatius of Antioch (c. 35–107 AD), then given more consideration by the Christian apologist in Rome, Justin Martyr (c. 100–165).[219] Treatment of eschatology continued in the West in the teachings of the influential theologian of Roman North Africa, Tertullian (c. 160–225), and was given fuller reflection and speculation soon after in the East by the master theologian, Origen (c. 185–254).[220] 
 Martin Luther, John Calvin, and other 16th-century reformers wrote long tracts about the End Times, but interest in eschatology dwindled after the Reformation until the late 19th century, when it became popular in the Reformed, Pentecostal, and Evangelical sects. It was increasingly recognized as a formal division of theological study during the 20th century. 
 The second coming of Christ is the central event in Christian eschatology. Most Christians believe that death and suffering will continue to exist until Christ's return. Others believe that suffering will gradually be eliminated prior to his coming, and that the elimination of injustice is our part in preparing for that event. Needless to say, there are a variety of viewpoints concerning the order and significance of eschatological events. 
 The Preterist approach (from the Latin praeteritus "gone by") seeks parallels between Revelation and the events of the 1st century, such as Herod's attempt to kill the infant Christ, the struggle of Christianity to survive the persecutions of Judaism and the Roman Empire, the fall of Jerusalem in 70 AD, the desecration of the temple in the same year, and the growth of Christianity from a sect within Judaism to an independent religion. 
 The Historicist method takes a broader historical approach and seeks parallels between Revelation and the major people and events of history, especially those which have had a direct effect on Israel and the Church. 
 The Futurist method approaches Revelation as chiefly referring to events that have not yet come to pass but will take place at the end of this age and at the end of the world. The main focus is the return of Christ. 
 The Idealist model, also known as Spiritualist or Symbolic model, approaches the images of Revelation as symbols representing larger themes and concepts, rather than actual people and events. It sees in Revelation an allegorical representation of the ongoing struggle of the forces of light and darkness, and the ultimate triumph of good over evil. 
 ^ See, e.g., Daniel L. Migliore, Faith Seeking Understanding: An Introduction to Christian Theology (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2004) 
 ^ See, e.g., David Burrell, Freedom and Creation in Three Traditions (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1994) 
 ^ See for example John Shelby Spong, Why Christianity Must Change or Die (New York: Harper Collins, 2001) 
 ^ See, e.g., Duncan Dormor et al. (eds), Anglicanism, the Answer to Modernity (London: Continuum, 2003) 
 ^ For example, see Timothy Gorringe, Crime, Changing Society and the Churches Series (London: SPCK, 2004). 
 ^ Compare: Jenson, Robert W. (1997). "1: What Systematic Theology Is About". Systematic Theology. 1: The Triune God (revised ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press (published 2001). p. 22. ISBN 9780195145984. Retrieved 5 February 2019. Systematic theology is so called because it takes up questions posed not only by current urgency but also by perceived inherent connections of the faith. Thus systematic theology may raise problems that have not yet emerged in the church's life, and maintain discussions whose immediate ecclesial-pastoral challenge is in abeyance. [...] 'Systematic' theology is [...] concerned with the truth of the gospel, whether dogmatically defined or not. 
 ^ The Douay–Rheims Bible, relying on the Vulgate, has "All scripture, inspired of God, is profitable to teach ...". See the comment in the New Jerusalem Bible study edition - footnote 'e', page 1967, Darton Longman Todd, 1985. ISBN 0-232-52077-1, but with the caution "less probably". 
 ^ Daniel B. Wallace (1996). Greek Grammar Beyond the Basics: An Exegetical Syntax of the New Testament. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan. pp. 313–314. ISBN 0-310-21895-0. Many scholars feel that the translation should be: 'Every inspired scripture is also profitable.' This is probably not the best translation, however, for the following reasons: (1) Contextually [...] (2) Grammatically [...] 
 ^ Heinrich Bullinger's Second Helvetic Confession (1566), Of the Holy Scripture Being the True Word of God - "We believe and confess the canonical Scriptures of the holy prophets and apostles of both Testaments to be the true Word of God, and to have sufficient authority of themselves, not of men. [...] And in this Holy Scripture, the universal Church of Christ has the most complete exposition of all that pertains to a saving faith, and also to the framing of a life acceptable to God [...]." 
 ^ Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy (1978), Online text: "Article XI We affirm that Scripture, having been given by divine inspiration, is infallible, so that, far from misleading us, it is true and reliable in all the matters it addresses." 
 ^ Catechism of the Catholic Church: "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 9 June 2010. Retrieved 15 March 2020.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) - "107 The inspired books teach the truth. 'Since therefore all that the inspired authors or sacred writers affirm should be regarded as affirmed by the Holy Spirit, we must acknowledge that the books of Scripture firmly, faithfully, and without error teach that truth which God, for the sake of our salvation, wished to see confided to the Sacred Scriptures.'" 
 ^ Compare: "Bible Infallibility - 'Evangelical' Defenders of the Faith". The Westminster Review. Leonard Scott Publication. 75: 49. January 1861. Retrieved 6 September 2020. [...] the doctrine of the infallibility of the Bible, a doctrine which, according to Mr. Ayre and his school, the apostles held and Christ sanctioned; which from the earliest times the Church has adopted, and which the plenary as well as the verbal inspirationists still maintain. 
 ^ Catholic Encyclopedia: Canon of the New Testament: "The idea of a complete and clear-cut canon of the New Testament existing from the beginning, that is from Apostolic times, has no foundation in history." 
 ^ a b Stagg, Frank. New Testament Theology, Nashville: Broadman, 1962. 
 ^ Herman Bavinck, The Doctrine of God. Edinburgh: The Banner of Truth Trust, 1979. 
 ^ The Westminster Shorter Catechism's definition of God is merely an enumeration of his attributes: "God is a Spirit, infinite, eternal, and unchangeable in his being, wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness, and truth."Westminster Shorter Catechism, Question and Answer 4. The Westminster Larger Catechism adds certain attributes to this description, such as "all-sufficient," "incomprehensible," "every where present" and "knowing all things". Westminster Larger Catechism, Question and Answer 7. This answer has been criticised, however, as having "nothing specifically Christian about it."James B. Jordan, "What is God?," Biblical Horizons Newsletter, No. 82. 
 ^ D. A. Carson, The Gagging of God (Grand Rapids: Zondervan), 1996. 
 ^ David J. Bosch, Transforming Mission (Maryknoll: Orbis Books, 1991), 390. 
 ^ Providence in The Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Religions. 
 ^ Gresham, Machen, J. (1998). God Transcendent. Banner of Truth publishers. ISBN 0-85151-355-7. 
 ^ a b Critical Terms for Religious Studies. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1998. Credo Reference. 27 July 2009 
 ^ a b c d e Encyclopædia Britannica: Purgatory in world religions: "The idea of purification or temporary punishment after death has ancient roots and is well-attested in early Christian literature. The conception of purgatory as a geographically situated place is largely the achievement of medieval Christian piety and imagination." 
 ^ a b c d e f g h i j "Trinity, doctrine of the". he Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church. Oxford University Press. 2005. ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3. 
 ^ J.N.D. Kelly, Early Christian Doctrines pp. 87–90; T. Desmond Alexander, New Dictionary of Biblical Theology pp. 514–515; Alister E. McGrath, Historical Theology p. 61. 
 ^ Diana L. Eck (2003) Encountering God: A Spiritual Journey from Bozeman to Banaras. p. 98 
 ^ "God sent forth His Son... that we might receive the adoption as sons. And because you are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of His Son into your hearts crying out, "Abba, Father!" Therefore you are no longer a slave but a son, and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ..[Galatians 4:4–7] 
 ^ "A brief account of the early Church councils and the Church fathers shows that they adopted the doctrine of the eternal subordination of the Son, and that this doctrine continues in the Church as orthodoxy to this day." Stephen D. Kovach and Peter R. Schemm Jr., "A Defense of the Doctrine of the Eternal Subordination of the Son", Journal of the Evangelical Theological Society 42 (1999): 461–476. 
 ^ * The Seven Ecumenical Councils, from the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, vols. 2–14 (CCEL.org) Contains detailed statements from each of these councils. The First Council of Nicaea, Council of Ephesus and Council of Chalcedon are the "First," "Third" and "Fourth" Ecumenical Councils, respectively. 
 ^ Martin Lembke, lecture in the course "Meetings with the World's Religions", Centre for Theology and Religious Studies, Lund University, Spring Term 2010. 
 ^ Gregory of Nyssa, Antirrheticus adversus Apollinarem. 
 ^ "Theodore" in The Westminster Dictionary of Christian History, ed. J. Brauer. Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1971. 
 ^ Greene, Colin J. D. (2003). Christology in Cultural Perspective: Marking Out the Horizons. London: Paternoster Press. p. 30. ISBN 978-1842270158. 
 ^ Millard J. Erickson (1992). Introducing Christian Doctrine. Baker Book House. p. 103. ISBN 0-8010-3215-6. 
 ^ a b T C Hammond (1968). David F Wright (ed.). In Understanding be Men:A Handbook of Christian Doctrine (sixth ed.). Inter-Varsity Press. pp. 54–56, 128–131. 
 ^ The Holy Spirit and His Gifts. J. Oswald Sanders. Inter-Varsity Press. chapter 5. 
 ^ a b c d e Millard J. Erickson (1992). Introducing Christian Doctrine. Baker Book House. pp. 265–270. ISBN 0-8010-3215-6. 
 ^ Though the term "born again" is most frequently used by evangelical Christians, most denominations do consider that the new Christian is a "new creation" and "born again". See for example the Catholic Encyclopedia [1] 
 ^ T C Hammond (1968). David F Wright (ed.). In Understanding be Men:A Handbook of Christian Doctrine (sixth ed.). Inter-Varsity Press. p. 134. 
 ^ Millard J. Erickson (1992). Introducing Christian Doctrine. Baker Book House. pp. 267–268. ISBN 0-8010-3215-6. 
 ^ a b c Millard J. Erickson (1992). Introducing Christian Doctrine. Baker Book House. pp. 265–275. ISBN 0-8010-3215-6. 
 ^ "A careful examination of the biblical material, particularly the words nefesh, neshama, and ruaḥ, which are often too broadly translated as "soul" and "spirit," indicates that these must not be understood as referring to the psychical side of a psychophysical pair. A man did not possess a nefesh but rather was a nefesh, as Gen. 2:7 says: "wayehi ha-adam le-nefesh ḥayya" (". . . and the man became a living being"). Man was, for most of the biblical writers, what has been called "a unit of vital power," not a dual creature separable into two distinct parts of unequal importance and value. While this understanding of the nature of man dominated biblical thought, in apocalyptic literature (2nd century BC–2nd century AD) the term nefesh began to be viewed as a separable psychical entity with existence apart from body.... The biblical view of man as an inseparable psychosomatic unit meant that death was understood to be his dissolution."—Britannica, 2004. 
 ^ The early Hebrews apparently had a concept of the soul but did not separate it from the body, although later Jewish writers developed the idea of the soul further. Old Testament references to the soul are related to the concept of breath and establish no distinction between the ethereal soul and the corporeal body. Christian concepts of a body-soul dichotomy originated with the ancient Greeks andwere introduced into Christian theology at an early date by St. Gregory of Nyssa and by St. Augustine.—Britannica, 2004 
 ^ D. K. Innes, "Sheol" in New Bible Dictionary, IVP 1996. 
 ^ Freedman, David Noel; Myers, Allen C.; Beck, Astrid B. (2000). "Cherubim". Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8028-2400-4. 
 ^ Davidson, Gustav (1994) [1967]. A Dictionary of Fallen Angels, Including the Fallen Angels. New York, NY: Macmillan, Inc. ISBN 978-0-02-907052-9. 
 ^ Book for Commemoration of the Living and the Dead, trans. Father Lawrence (Holy Trinity Monastery, Jordanville NY), p. 77. 
 ^ Treated extensively in C. S. Lewis, The Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval and Renaissance Literature (1964). 
 ^ For instance, with Justin Martyr. See: Philippe Bobichon, "Millénarisme et orthodoxie dans les écrits de Justin Martyr" in Mélanges sur la question millénariste de l’Antiquité à nos jours, Martin Dumont (dir.) [Bibliothèque d'étude des mondes chrétiens, 11], Paris, 2018, pp. 61-82 
 ^ "What happens after a person dies?". The United Methodist Church. Retrieved 10 March 2011. Purgatory is believed to be a place where the souls of the faithful dead endure a period of purification and cleansing, aided by the prayers of the living, prior to their entrance into heaven. Although John Wesley believed in an intermediate state between death and the final judgment, that idea is not formally affirmed in Methodist doctrine, which "reject the idea of purgatory but beyond that maintain silence on what lies between death and the last judgment." (Methodist Doctrine: The Essentials by Ted A. Campbell) 
 ^ Robin Russell. "Heavenly minded: It's time to get our eschatology right, say scholars, authors". UM Portal. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 10 March 2011. John Wesley believed in the intermediate state between death and the final judgment "where believers would share in the 'bosom of Abraham' or 'paradise,’ even continuing to grow in holiness there," writes Ted Campbell, a professor at Perkins School of Theology, in his 1999 book Methodist Doctrine: The Essentials (Abingdon). That view has not been officially affirmed by the Church. 
 ^ a b c d e "Hell." Cross, F. L., ed. The Oxford dictionary of the Christian church. New York: Oxford University Press. 2005 
 ^ New Bible Dictionary third edition, IVP 1996. Articles on "Hell", "Sheol". 
 ^ a b c Evangelical Alliance Commission on Unity and Truth among Evangelicals (2000). The Nature of Hell. Acute, Paternoster (London). ISBN 0-9532992-2-8. 
 ^ Honderich, Ted (2005). "theodicy". The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. ISBN 0-19-926479-1. John Hick, for example, proposes a theodicy, while Alvin Plantinga formulates a defense. The idea of human free will often appears in both of these strategies, but in different ways. 
 ^ William A. Dembski, The End of Christianity: Finding a Good God in an Evil World. (Nashville: Broadman and Holman, 2009 
 ^ Ehrman, Bart D., God's Problem: How the Bible Fails to Answer Our Most Important Question – Why We Suffer. HarperOne, 2008 
 ^ Bavink, Herman. Reformed Dogmatics Vol. 3. (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2004) pp. 75–125 detail the historical development of Hamartiology, including Pelagius's position and the mediating positions) 
 ^ Paul's Epistle to the Romans, chapter 3 verse 23 
 ^ "Original Sin". Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church. Oxford University Press. 2005. ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3. 
 ^ Brodd, Jeffrey (2003). World Religions. Winona, MN: Saint Mary's Press. ISBN 978-0-88489-725-5. 
 ^ Augustine wrote to Julian of Eclanum: Sed si disputatione subtilissima et elimatissima opus est, ut sciamus utrum primos homines insipientia superbos, an insipientes superbia fecerit. (Contra Julianum, V, 4.18; PL 44, 795) 
 ^ Augustine wrote to Julian of Eclanum: Quis enim negat futurum fuisse concubitum, etiamsi peccatum non-praecessisset? Sed futurus fuerat, sicut aliis membris, ita etiam genitalibus voluntate motis, non-libidine concitatis; aut certe etiam ipsa libidine– ut non-vos de illa nimium contristemus– non-qualis nunc est, sed ad nutum voluntarium serviente (Contra Julianum, IV. 11. 57; PL 44, 766). See also his late work: Contra secundam Iuliani responsionem imperfectum opus, II, 42; PL 45,1160; ibid. II, 45; PL 45,1161; ibid., VI, 22; PL 45, 1550–1551. Cf.Schmitt, É. (1983). Le mariage chrétien dans l'oeuvre de Saint Augustin. Une théologie baptismale de la vie conjugale. Études Augustiniennes. Paris. p. 104. 
 ^ Justo L. Gonzalez (1970–1975). A History of Christian Thought: Volume 2 (From Augustine to the eve of the Reformation). Abingdon Press. 
 ^ Therefore, just as sin came into the world through one man, and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because all sinned—for sin indeed was in the world before the law was given, but sin is not counted where there is no law. Yet death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those whose sinning was not like the transgression of Adam, who was a type of the one who was to come.—Romans 5:12–14, ESV "Therefore, as one trespass led to condemnation for all men, so one act of righteousness leads to justification and life for all men. For as by the one man's disobedience the many were made sinners, so by the one man's obedience the many will be made righteous. Now the law came in to increase the trespass, but where sin increased, grace abounded all the more, so that, as sin reigned in death, grace also might reign through righteousness leading to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord."—Rom. 5:18–21, ESV 
 ^ Arminius, James The Writings of James Arminius (three vols.), tr. James Nichols and William R. Bagnall (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1956), I:252 
 ^ Ra McLaughlin. "Total Depravity, part 1". Reformed Perspectives. Retrieved 14 July 2008. [Any person] can do outwardly good works, but these works come from a heart that hates God, and therefore fail to meet God's righteous standards. 
 ^ Charles Partee, The Theology of John Calvin (Westminster John Knox, 2008), 129. "By total depravity Calvin means totally susceptible to sin." 
 ^ John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, trans. Henry Beveridge, III.23.2. 
 ^ John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, trans. Henry Beveridge, II.3.5. 
 ^ John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, trans. Henry Beveridge, III.3.6. 
 ^ a b c d "Calvinism and Lutheranism Compared". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 7 February 2009. Retrieved 26 January 2015. Both (Lutherans and Calvinists) agree on the devastating nature of the fall and that man by nature has no power to aid in his conversions...and that election to salvation is by grace. In Lutheranism the German term for election is Gnadenwahl, election by grace--there is no other kind. 
 ^ Robert L. Browning and Roy A. Reed, Forgiveness, Reconciliation, and Moral Courage (Eerdmans, 2004), 113. "Luther did not mean by 'total depravity' that everything a person did was depraved. He meant that depravity, sin and wickedness can invade any and every part of life." 
 ^ Henry Cole, trans, Martin Luther on the Bondage of the Will (London, T. Bensley, 1823), 66. The controversial term liberum arbitrium was translated "free-will" by Cole. However Ernest Gordon Rupp and Philip Saville Watson, Luther and Erasmus: Free Will and Salvation (Westminister, 1969) chose "free choice" as their translation. 
 ^ Roger E. Olson, Arminian Theology: Myths and Realities (InterVarsity Press, 2009), 17. "Arminians of the heart emphatically do not deny total depravity," but prefer not to use the word. 
 ^ Keith D. Stanglin and Thomas H. McCall, Jacob Arminius: Theologian of Grace (Oxford University, 2012), 157–158. 
 ^ Table drawn from, though not copied, from Lange, Lyle W. God So Loved the World: A Study of Christian Doctrine. Milwaukee: Northwestern Publishing House, 2006. p. 448. 
 ^ John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, trans. Henry Beveridge, III.23.2. 
 ^ John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, trans. Henry Beveridge, II.3.5. 
 ^ John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, trans. Henry Beveridge, III.3.6. 
 ^ WELS Topical Q&A: WELS vs Assembly of God: "[P]eople by nature are dead in their tranbsgressions (sic) and sin and therefore have no ability to decide of Christ (Ephesians 2:1, 5). We do not choose Christ, rather he chose us (John 15:16) We believe that human beings are purely passive in conversion." 
 ^ Augsburg Confessional, Article XVIII, Of Free Will, saying: "(M)an's will has some liberty to choose civil righteousness, and to work things subject to reason. But it has no power, without the Holy Ghost, to work the righteousness of God, that is, spiritual righteousness; since the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God (1 Cor. 2:14); but this righteousness is wrought in the heart when the Holy Ghost is received through the Word." 
 ^ Henry Cole, trans., Martin Luther on the Bondage of the Will (London, T. Bensley, 1823), 66. The controversial term liberum arbitrium was translated "free-will" by Cole. However Ernest Gordon Rupp and Philip Saville Watson, Luther and Erasmus: Free Will and Salvation (Westminister, 1969) chose "free choice" as their translation. 
 ^ Stanglin, Keith D.; McCall, Thomas H. (15 November 2012). Jacob Arminius: Theologian of Grace. New York: OUP USA. pp. 157–158. 
 ^ The Book of Concord: The Confessions of the Lutheran Church, XI. Election. "Predestination" means "God's ordination to salvation". 
 ^ Olson, Roger E. (2009). Arminian Theology: Myths and Realities. Downers Grove: InterVarsity Press. p. 63. “Arminians accepts divine election, [but] they believe it is conditional." 
 ^ The Westminster Confession, III:6, says that only the "elect" are "effectually called, justified, adopted, sanctified, and saved." However in his Calvin and the Reformed Tradition (Baker, 2012), 45, Richard A. Muller observes that "a sizeable body of literature has interpreted Calvin as teaching "limited atonement", but "an equally sizeable body . . . [interprets] Calvin as teaching "unlimited atonement". 
 ^ "Justification / Salvation". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 27 September 2009. Retrieved 29 January 2015. Romans 3:23-24, 5:9, 18 are other passages that lead us to say that it is most appropriate and accurate to say that universal justification is a finished fact. God has forgiven the sins of the whole world whether people believe it or not. He has done more than "made forgiveness possible." All this is for the sake of the perfect substitutionary work of Jesus Christ. 
 ^ "IV. Justification by Grace through Faith". This We Believe. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Retrieved 5 February 2015. We believe that God has justified all sinners, that is, he has declared them righteous for the sake of Christ. This is the central message of Scripture upon which the very existence of the church depends. It is a message relevant to people of all times and places, of all races and social levels, for "the result of one trespass was condemnation for all men" (Romans 5:18). All need forgiveness of sins before God, and Scripture proclaims that all have been justified, for "the result of one act of righteousness was justification that brings life for all men" (Romans 5:18). We believe that individuals receive this free gift of forgiveness not on the basis of their own works, but only through faith (Ephesians 2:8–9). ... On the other hand, although Jesus died for all, Scripture says that "whoever does not believe will be condemned" (Mark 16:16). Unbelievers forfeit the forgiveness won for them by Christ (John 8:24). 
 ^ "Universal Justification". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 27 September 2009. Retrieved 5 February 2015. Christ paid for all our sins. God the Father has therefore forgiven them. But to benefit from this verdict we need to hear about it and trust in it. If I deposit money in the bank for you, to benefit from it you need to hear about it and use it. Christ has paid for your sins, but to benefit from it you need to hear about it and believe in it. We need to have faith but we should not think of faith as our contribution. It is a gift of God which the Holy Spirit works in us. 
 ^ Augsburg Confession, Article V, Of Justification. People "cannot be justified before God by their own strength, merits, or works, but are freely justified for Christ's sake, through faith, when they believe that they are received into favor, and that their sins are forgiven for Christ's sake. ..." 
 ^ Stanglin, Keith D.; McCall, Thomas H. (15 November 2012). Jacob Arminius: Theologian of Grace. New York: OUP USA. p. 136. Faith is a condition of justification 
 ^ Paul ChulHong Kang, Justification: The Imputation of Christ's Righteousness from Reformation Theology to the American Great Awakening and the Korean Revivals (Peter Lang, 2006), 70, note 171. Calvin generally defends Augustine’s "monergistic view". 
 ^ Diehl, Walter A. "The Age of Accountability". Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary. Retrieved 10 February 2015. In full accord with Scripture the Lutheran Confessions teach monergism. "In this manner, too, the Holy Scriptures ascribe conversion, faith in Christ, regeneration, renewal and all the belongs to their efficacious beginning and completion, not to the human powers of the natural free will, neither entirely, nor half, nor in any, even the least or most inconsiderable part, but in solidum, that is, entirely, solely, to the divine working and the Holy Ghost" (Trigl. 891, F.C., Sol. Decl., II, 25). 
 ^ Olson, Roger E. (2009). Arminian Theology: Myths and Realities. Downers Grove: InterVarsity Press. p. 18. Arminian synergism" refers to "evangelical synergism, which affirms the prevenience of grace. 
 ^ Olson, Roger E. (2010). "One more quick sidebar about clarifying Arminianism". My evangelical, Arminian theological musings. Retrieved 27 August 2019. Classical Arminianism does NOT say God never interferes with free will. It says God NEVER foreordains or renders certain evil. [...] An Arminian COULD believe in divine dictation of Scripture and not do violence to his or her Arminian beliefs. [...] Arminianism is not in love with libertarian free will –as if that were central in and of itself. Classical Arminians have gone out of our way (beginning with Arminius himself) to make clear that our sole reasons for believe in free will AS ARMINIANS [...] are 1) to avoid making God the author of sin and evil, and 2) to make clear human responsibility for sin and evil. 
 ^ "Once saved always saved". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 27 September 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2015. People can fall from faith. The Bible warns, "If you think you are standing firm, be careful that you don't fall" (1 Corinthians 10:12). Some among the Galatians had believed for a while, but had fallen into soul-destroying error. Paul warned them, "You who are trying to be justified by law have been alienated from Christ; you have fallen away from grace" (Galatians 5:4). In his explanation of the parable of the sower, Jesus says, "Those on the rock are the ones who receive the word with joy when they hear it, but they have no root. They believe for a while, but in time of testing they fall away" (Luke 8:13). According to Jesus a person can believe for a while and then fall away. While they believed they possessed eternal salvation, but when they fell from faith they lost God's gracious gift. 
 ^ "Perseverence of the Saints (Once Saved Always Saved)". WELS Topical Q&A. Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. Archived from the original on 27 September 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2015. We cannot contribute one speck to our salvation, but by our own arrogance or carelessness we can throw it away. Therefore, Scripture urges us repeatedly to fight the good fight of faith (Ephesians 6 and 2 Timothy 4 for example). My sins threaten and weaken my faith, but the Spirit through the gospel in word and sacraments strengthens and preserves my faith. That’s why Lutherans typically speak of God’s preservation of faith and not the perseverance of the saints. The key is not our perseverance but the Spirit’s preservation. 
 ^ Demarest, Bruce A. (1997). The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation. Crossway Books. pp. 437–438. 
 ^ Demarest, Bruce A. (1997). The Cross and Salvation: The Doctrine of Salvation. Crossway Books. p. 35. Many Arminians deny the doctrine of the perseverance of the saints. 
 ^ And as they were eating, he took bread, and blessed (εὐλογήσας– eulogēsas), and broke it, and gave it to them, and said, "Take; this is my body." And he took a cup, and when he had given thanks (εὐχαριστήσας– eucharistēsas) he gave it to them, and they all drank of it. And he said to them, "This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many. Truly, I say to you, I shall not drink again of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God." Mark 14:22–25 
 ^ Now as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed (εὐλογήσας– eulogēsas), and broke it, and gave it to the disciples and said, "Take, eat; this is my body." And he took a cup, and when he had given thanks (εὐχαριστήσας– eucharistēsas) he gave it to them, saying, "Drink of it, all of you; for this is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins. I tell you I shall not drink again of this fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom." Matthew 26:26–29 
 ^ They prepared the passover. And when the hour came, he sat at table, and the apostles with him. And he said to them, "I have earnestly desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer; for I tell you I shall not eat it until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God." And he took a cup, and when he had given thanks (εὐχαριστήσας– eucharistēsas) he said, "Take this, and divide it among yourselves; for I tell you that from now on I shall not drink of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes." And he took bread, and when he had given thanks (εὐχαριστήσας– eucharistēsas) he broke it and gave it to them, saying, "This is my body which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of me." And likewise the cup after supper, saying, "This cup which is poured out for you is the new covenant in my blood. ..." Luke 22:13–20 
 ^ "There are now two quite separate Eucharistic celebrations given in Didache 9–10, with the earlier one now put in second place." Crossan. The historical Jesus. Citing Riggs, John W. 1984 
 ^ " ... (t)he eucharist is the flesh of our Saviour Jesus Christ, which flesh suffered for our sins, and which in His loving-kindness the Father raised up. ... Let that eucharist alone be considered valid which is under the bishop or him to whom he commits it. ... It is not lawful apart from the bishop either to baptize, or to hold a love-feast. But whatsoever he approves, that also is well-pleasing to God, that everything which you do may be secure and valid." Letter to the Smyrnaeans, 6, 8 "Give heed to keep one Eucharist. For there is one flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ, and one cup unto union with His blood. There is one altar, as there is one bishop, together with the presbytery and deacons, my fellow-servants; that whatsoever you do, you may do according unto God."Letter to the Philadelphians, 4 
 ^ "Most Christian traditions also teach that Jesus is present in the Eucharist in some special way, though they disagree about the mode, the locus, and the time of that presence" (Encyclopædia Britannica Online). 
 ^ Alexander Roberts & James Donaldson, eds. Ante-Nicene Fathers. (16 vol.) Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson, 1994. The writings of Ignatius and Justin Martyr can be found in Vol. 1; Tertullian, in Volumes 3–4; and Origen, in Volume 4. 
 Berkhof, Louis. (1996). The History of Christian Doctrine. Banner of Truth. ISBN 0-85151-005-1. 
 See the Christian Theology Reading Room (Tyndale Seminary) for an extensive collection of online resources for Christian Theology. 

 id="file23242750" filename="christmas-means-we-all-belong-christ-and-each-other" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.ncronline.org/news/opinion/soul-seeing/christmas-means-we-all-belong-christ-and-each-other">
 Christmas means we all belong, to Christ and to each other 
 Our faith has so many beautiful teachings it's a wonder that our hearts don't burst with joy. 
 Consider these two: 
 The Incarnation. The Son of God becomes the Son of Man so we can become the children of God. It is the meaning of Christmas. It is the beginning of our faith. 
 The mystical body of Christ. We have become one with Christ and each other. It is an extension of the Incarnation. It is our Christmas story. 
 St. Paul in his letter to the Corinthians compares the mystical body to the body we can touch: "Just as the human body is one body but has many members, and all the members of the body, though many, are one body, so also is the spiritual body of Christ" (1 Corinthians 12:12). 
 The comparison makes me think of the old spiritual some of us sang as kids: just as the backbone is connected to the shoulder bone and the shoulder bone connected to the neck bone and the neck bone connected to the head bone — all parts of one body — in Christ I am part of you and you are part of me and we are really one, indivisible and interdependent. What could be simpler, and more profound? 
 We all belong, to Christ and to each other. Everyone has a purpose. We are one in Christ Jesus and, despite appearances, connected to each other. We need each other. 
 St. Paul writes: "The eye cannot say to the hand, 'I do not need you,' nor again the head to the feet, 'I do not need you.' " We are many members of one body, and what hurts one, hurts all of us. What honors one, honors all. We depend upon Christ "in whom we live and move and have our being" (Acts 17:28) and the Christ who lives in each of us. 
 What blesses one, blesses all, independent of space and time. The mystical body of Christ is not a dogma, it is a vibrant spiritual community with Christ as its head. 
 We can trace the biblical DNA of the mystical body to Jesus himself, who told us that someday we would understand that "I am in my Father, you are in me, and I am in you" (John 14:20), and went on to teach us how to pray by saying, "Our Father…" 
 St. Paul then described it, the saints lived it, and in 1943 Pope Pius XII promulgated the teaching in his encyclical Mystici Corporis Christi. That letter describes the church as a mystical union of all Christians with Jesus as its head, the word mystical meaning "of a spiritual nature." The term mystical body signifies a spiritual union, an essential oneness, an unbreakable wholeness. 
 In 1965, the Second Vatican Council in a historic document called Lumen Gentium, or "Light of the World," expanded the idea of mystical body to embrace everybody of all time because Christ died for all of us We are all baptized — whether by water or fire or desire — by one Spirit, and, as St. Paul reminds us again and again, "now we are Christ's one body." 
 Isn't it amazing how science now bolsters spirituality, affirming what the mystics have written about for centuries? We hear about "the butterfly effect," how when a butterfly flaps its wings in India a storm brews in Indiana. What happens to each of us happens to all of us. When a child in Calcutta goes hungry a child in California can sense her pain. When a Samaritan helps a wounded man on the side of the road, a hospital goes up 2,000 years later. 
 What blesses one, blesses all, independent of space and time. The mystical body of Christ is not a dogma, it is a vibrant spiritual community with Christ as its head. 
 Advertisement 
 Advertisement 
 So, we need each other because we are each other. Our work on earth is to glow for God and become light to each other: the weak and the strong, the celebrated and the ignored, those on the inside and those on the outs, those in the shadows, and even those who are despised. 
 "To be connected with the church," writes theologian Ronald Rolheiser, "is to be associated with scoundrels, warmongers, fakes, child molesters, murderers, adulterers and hypocrites of every description. It also, at the same time, identifies you with saints and the finest persons of heroic soul of every time, country, race, and gender. To be a member of the church is to carry the mantle of both the worst sin and the finest heroism of soul because the church always looks exactly as it looked at the original crucifixion, God hung among thieves." 
 The mystical body of Christ not only points to a profound truth of our being, it is profoundly practical. It is the basis for charity, it is the foundation for forgiveness. It inspires us to see the truth — and be the truth — in our daily lives. 
 When standing in line at the checkout counter, I remind myself that the lady in front of me is, like me, a member of the one mystical body of Christ, and that the injunction to love her as I love myself (Mark 12:31), is literally true because she is part of our one Self. A little miracle then happens: I not only love her, I like her, and if her credit card is no good or the odd piece of kohlrabi doesn't scan, I don't get mad. 
 While walking down the street, I smile at a stranger walking his pit bull and choose to see him the same way God sees me. I say hello, and an alchemy of grace happens: The stranger smiles back and says hello, and we are strangers no more. What we give, we get right back. Even dogs know that. 
 We all belong. We are one. We love our neighbor as ourself because we are our neighbor. And our neighbor is us. 
 While watching the news — seeing people die, children starve, families struggle — I ask Jesus, the head of the body connected to all those who seem to be "out there" — to see for me. I close my eyes, and hear him whisper: "My peace I give you, my peace I leave you" (John 14:27). We are all members of one spiritual body. Any member can literally give another member her peace, across space and time, and the peace of both will increase and multiply. We can watch the news and ask God for peace of mind and give that peace to someone else, and suddenly experience a peace that is beyond understanding. This is what it means to be a member of the mystical body of Christ! 
 We all belong. We are one. We love our neighbor as ourself because we are our neighbor. And our neighbor is us. We even love those whom we think are our enemies, because in the kingdom of God there are no enemies. There is only Christ and each of us, all of us, inseparable members of one great body of love. It is real. It is there. It's here. 
 When you gaze at your Christmas tree and its many lights of red and blue and green, and its many branches holding many ornaments of every shape and texture, realize that the stable beneath it with the infant in his crib symbolizes the Incarnation — God become man so we may become like God — and that the many shepherds and wise men and sheep together with all those lights and ornaments remind us of our reality in the mystical body of Christ — many parts shining bright as one glorious tree of life. 
 And if you don't have a tree, that's all right, you get the idea. 
 Then, when you go to Mass on Christmas Day and get in your pew, be sure to look in front of you, to your left, then your right, then behind you, and you will see what you already are, an indispensable member of one great glowing family in Christ. What on earth could be more beautiful? 
 Michael Leach has written, edited and published more than 3,000 books over a 50-year career, still in progress. This column is adapted from a chapter he wrote for a newly published book Thirsty, and You Gave Me Drink: Homilies and Reflections for Cycle C, edited by Deacon Jim Knipper (Clear Faith Publishing). 
 Enter your email address to receive free newsletters from NCR. 
 Email address 
 Join the Conversation 
 Send your thoughts and reactions to Letters to the Editor. Learn more here 

 id="file23242818" filename="church-of-christ" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.faithfacts.org/world-religions-and-theology/church-of-christ">
 Note: In addition to this article, please see also our article on "Cults, Heresies, and Heterodoxies." In particular, please note the section on heterodoxy that discusses Six Critical Issues of Liberalism and Five Critical Issues of Legalism. 
 This article is an inside look at the Church of Christ. Our sources are from writings of Church of Christ preachers and college professors. See the bibliography at the end. 
 Church of Christ members are among the most sincere students of the Bible. They are attempting to bring the church back to a pure biblical faith and obedient practice. This is most refreshing! They are a beacon of light in their effort to restore biblical Christianity. We, as evangelicals, unite with them on the view that the Bible is the inerrant Word of God. 
 However, many Christians believe that the Church of Christ is mistaken on some key issues. We should note that Church of Christ people are not monolithic in their views. For simplicity's sake, we can divide the group into two factions. One group is the traditional faction. This group is sometimes referred to by outsiders as "ultraconservative" or "legalistic" or "legalistic patternists." One distinguishing mark of the traditional group is that they believe that salvation is at least partly by the works of man. A second minority group has moved away from legalism to a more orthodox position consistent with other Protestants. This second group emphasizes, like most other Christians, that salvation is by grace. 
 We are primarily concerned with addressing the views of the legalistic patternists—the traditional norm within the Church of Christ. Below is a summary of the doctrines of the majority within the Churches of Christ. The list below of doctrines is believed by all within the legalistic patternist group and at least some of them are believed by most within the Church of Christ. 
 "Not that we are competent in ourselves to claim anything as coming from us, but our competence is from God, who has made us competent to be ministers of a new covenant, not of the letter but of the Spirit. For the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life." (1 Cor 3:5-6) 
 DOCTRINAL SUMMARY OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST 
 They believe that their group has restored the New Testament church—"the ancient order." All other groups are in error, lost, and apostate. 
 They reject denominationalism and believe that they themselves are not a denomination. This is an unquestioned orthodoxy and they are careful not to use the term "other denominations" as that would include themselves in the denominational world. 
 They often deny that there are true Christians in the denominational world. 
 They put very high emphasis on "wearing the right name," which means that any group that does not call itself the "church of Christ" cannot be part of the true church. (The word church in church of Christ often has a lower case c, implying that they themselves are the church universal.) 
 They shun the use of the historic creeds and confessions of Christendom and believe that they have no creed themselves, relying only on the Bible. Their views, however, are in print in journals and numerous tracts. And they are famous for the creed-like formula: "Hear, Believe, Repent, Confess, and Be Baptized." 
 The gospel is often defined in terms of what a person must do to be saved—"obey the gospel." This is distinctly different from other Christian groups who understand the gospel to be the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus for the forgiveness of sins. 
 Baptism is only by immersion and it is an unstated inference that baptism can only be performed by another member of the Church of Christ. It is crucial that the one being baptized understand that his baptism is specifically for the remission of sins. Anyone not baptized by this formula is doomed to hell. (They even pronounce the word baptized differently by placing the accent on the second syllable.) 
 They believe that the New Testament is primarily a new legal code—the Law of Christ—that replaces the one of the Old Testament. One must follow rigidly the New Testament by their hermeneutic formula (Bible interpretation) of "Direct Command, Approved Example, and Necessary Inference"—although exactly what examples are "approved" and what inferences are "necessary" divide the various factions within the group. No faction, however, ever provides a list of exactly what things one must do to be saved. 
 They believe in patternism, that is, they attempt to copy what they think the earliest Christians did in their life and worship. They find patternism to be a necessary inference that must be rigidly followed in order to be pleasing to God (and thus saved). 
 This approach, they believe, leads to certain important conclusions such as the prohibition of instrumental music in worship. 
 They generally reject the Old Testament except in such instances that they find passages in the Old Testament that lend support to their doctrine. 
 According to historian Richard Hughes (see bibliography), grace is understood by the CC as something that God is obligated to give the believer who is obedient—though they would not phrase it this way. They will say that we are saved by grace, but . . . . It's what comes after the "but" that is important. What comes after the "but" is not consistent among them; here are some answers they may give: (a) God's grace provides a "way" to salvation, but it's up to us to save ourselves. (b) We are saved by grace up to the time of baptism and then is up to us to maintain our salvation by obedience. (c) Our response to God's grace is essential to receive the free gift of salvation, but that response involves "works of obedience" and not "works of merit." They do not see grace as the regeneration of our dead spirits, as a work of God apart from anything we do or can do. 
 They may also believe that grace is what God bestows to one who has done everything he can to be obedient. Again, while they may not state it in exactly these terms, we think that it is a necessary inference from their theology; thus grace is the small remaining step that remains toward salvation after one is correctly obedient. God fills the gap with his grace. (Interestingly, this is the same view of grace held by Mormons and Jehovah's Witnesses.) 
 When asked how they know that they are saved, they will probably say something like, "I have been obedient" or "I have been pleasing to God." 
 The role of Christ, and thus the atonement, was merely for the purpose of displaying God's love for man and giving him a law to obey that would bring life. Christ is said to save by furnishing man an example. He simply showed man how to save himself. 
 Their theology may be either semi-Pelagian (salvation by works plus God's grace) or full-Pelagian (God's grace and the righteousness of Christ may be nice to have, but are not necessary for salvation because one can save himself by obedience). 
 Despite their emphasis on patternism, works righteousness, the Law of Christ, and their view of grace that is similar to the pseudo-Christian cults, they deny that they are legalists. 
 The Holy Spirit is not well defined and is limited in his activities. The Holy Spirit is often said to be either not active today, or the Holy Spirit's activities may be limited to the words of the New Testament, or that the Spirit's activities are limited to helping us understand the Bible. In any case, they see the Holy Spirit's activities in a much more confined role than other Christians. So the Holy Spirit becomes, in a sense, the same as the Bible. There is little or no place for the Holy Spirit in regeneration or sanctification. Some even reject the notion that the Holy Spirit indwells a person, despite numerous mentions of this in the New Testament. 
 They deny (vehemently) the historic Christian doctrine of Original Sin, even though they may admit that (a) everyone sins, and (b) children have to be taught not to be sinful. Thus man sins, not because of any corruption in his nature, but because of his lack of understanding or simple stubbornness. This is a view they share with non-Christian groups: Muslims, communists, eastern religions, Mormons, and Jehovah's Witnesses. 
 They refuse to fellowship with other Christians, even other conservative Christians. 
 Question for the Church of Christ: Have we summarized your views correctly? 
 The Church of Christ is convinced that they have the precisely correct understanding of the Bible. But critics say that they have strayed from their original purpose of Christian unity. They accuse the Church of Christ of having a different gospel, being divisive and sectarian, legalistic, and ignoring or explaining away passages of Scripture that do no fit their presuppositional interpretation. Church of Christ author K. C. Moser accused his brothers of preaching A PLAN instead of THE MAN. By this he meant that they belittle the finished work of Jesus while elevating man's role in salvation. Could any of these charges against such a biblically based group be at all true? 
 Here is an article by a Church of Christ insider offering a candid look at their exclusive thinking. See chapter 18 of Heritage. 
 It appears, however, that the legalistic patternist segment of the Church of Christ is dwindling, as indicated by this article: Epiphanies. 
 If you are a Church of Christ person reading this, let us describe a situation that might be revealing. Let's say that you are introduced to a preacher or elder of conservative denomination (not Church of Christ). How do you feel inside? Do you greet this person with love and a feeling of warmth to be with another believer and servant of the Lord? Or do you immediately feel a sense of distance, antagonism, uneasiness, or superiority? 
 HISTORY OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST 
 Following is a brief history of the so-called Restoration Movement ("Stone-Campbell Movement") from which the Church of Christ arose. 
 The movement began in the early 1800's in Kentucky by Alexander Campbell, his father Thomas, and others—especially Barton Stone. Alexander Campbell, in 1809 while still living in Scotland, became concerned about the strict sectarianism of his Presbyterian group, which practiced a form of closed communion in which one had to have a token in order to participate. The whole idea repelled Alexander. He was convinced that no man had the right to determine the worthiness of another to receive God's forgiveness. When his turn came at one point, he returned his token to the elders and did not take communion. 
 In his heart he renounced allegiance to any church that proclaimed its path as the only way to the throne of God. Yet he insisted that the members of even these churches were true Christians. His concern was that the denominational structure imposed requirements that were not consistent with biblical unity. 
 Barton Stone, a Presbyterian minister on a similar tract, rejected sectism and started his own movement independent of Campbell. While the two groups had very different views on many issues, they agreed to accept one another as brothers in the faith and merged in 1832. Today, many people in the Restoration Movement refer to the movement as the Stone-Campbell Movement. However, the hypercon contingent resolutely refuses to acknowledge any association with these men. According to Richard Hughes, the reason is that to acknowledge any historical association would be to deny that they are direct descendants of the New Testament church. It would also be an admission that they are a denomination started by men. 
 Stone and Campbell became leaders of the idea that Christians should be able to spiritually unite on a few fundamental ideas. They held that insistence on matters of interpretation, denominationalism, credism, and ecclesiastical tyranny were not in the spirit of Christianity—given the many calls for peace and unity in the New Testament. Personal interpretation of Scripture should not be the basis for judging others or made the basis of Christian communion. Reflecting this noble idea, Stone and Campbell often said in slightly different variations, 
 Let us acknowledge all to be our brethren who believe in the Lord Jesus, repent of their sins, and humbly and honestly obey Him as far as they understand his will and their duty. 
 What a wonderful picture! If we may editorialize, this movement is perhaps the most underappreciated movement, at least in modern church history. These men had a passion for unity as fundamental to the Christian faith. They hailed with enthusiasm the least indications of a growing spirit of forbearance and brotherly love among the different denominations. They saw a spirit of unity among Christians as dethroning sin and Satan and converting the world. 
 We find much to admire in the original Restoration Movement. While today's members of the Church of Christ recoil at the term, based on the above statement of unity, many evangelicals today would indeed be honored to be called Cambellites! 
 Every Christian group has its own set of warts. Campbell noted the status of Christian division, "The constant insisting upon them [doctrinal opinions], as articles of faith and terms of salvation, have so beaten them into the minds of men, that, in many instances, they would as soon deny the Bible itself as give up one of those opinions." He believed that while we can debate doctrinal matters, they should not divide us. 
 However, reflecting the sinful and divisive tendencies of all of us humans, the Restoration Movement itself soon began dividing over differences. For most of the nineteenth century, the terms "Church of Christ," "Disciples of Christ," and "Christian Church" were used more or less interchangeably. But over time the terms became distinct and three groups emerged—the Church of Christ (conservative), the Christian Church (moderate/mainstream), and the Disciples of Christ (liberal). These have further divided so that today one can count over 2 dozen factions. Divisions came from every manner of opinion, including instrumental music, the manner of serving the Supper, millennial theories, missionary methods, orphan homes, cooperative programs with other Christian groups, whether to have Sunday School classes, etc. Those with opposing views were labeled "not sound in the faith" or "liberals" or "extremists" and were marked to be avoided, according to W. Carl Ketcherside in chapter 15 here: Totem. 
 We infer from Ketcherside and Garrett's inside look at the Church of Christ that this would be all but forgotten and forgiven history if a spirit of separation and condemnation were not still present today. There is adequate evidence for this claim, including a refusal to attend any non-approved church (except perhaps grudgingly at weddings and funerals)—and a special aversion to taking the Lord's Supper in any other church. CC churches seemingly spend a great deal of time studying other groups with the intent of condemning what they believe to be their many egregious errors. This has a tendency to bolster unity within their group. Sadly, the noble goal of uniting Christians ended up dividing us further. In our own tiny Texas town of a population of a few hundred souls, until just recently (2008) there were two Churches of Christ congregations who refused to fellowship with each other. 
 The divisions are so severe among the ultra-conservative factions that there is one faction referred to as the "One Cup" group. They believe that a congregation must all partake of the Lord's Supper from a single cup, which apparently cannot be refilled if they run out. Another group, the "Non-Institutional" group doesn't believe in supporting colleges, orphan homes, etc. out of the budget. Most of these ultraconservative factions refuse to have a meal in the church building, and would condemn any other group that disagrees. Here is an interesting article about this ("Reflections" Issue Number 423): Search and Destroy. A book that details the various factions is Churches of Christ in the United States by Carl H. Royster. 
 What seems to have been both the glue that held the Churches of Christ together over the years, but have also been a force of theological battles are journals. The first and most important journal was Alexander Campbell's Christian Baptist. Campbell edited this journal from 1823 to 1830. Barton Stone edited his own journal from 1826 to 1844 called the Christian Messenger. A number of other journals, including a second one that Campbell himself edited later, have dominated Church of Christ thinking to this day. Hughes believes that the editors of these journals wielded so much authority that they functioned much like bishops! 
 Campbell postulated two key doctrines: (1) restoration (or primitivism), and (2) Christian unity. Hughes points out in his history of the group that Campbell never grasped that these two goals are irreconcilable and mutually exclusive. His followers tended to coalesce around one or the other of these themes. So splits and disagreements were inevitable. His goal of restoration tended to be sectarian and exclusivist. His goal of unity based on his own simplistic principles ironically had the unintended effect of division by refusing to acknowledge denominational distinctives. 
 Campbell himself shifted emphasis over his life. His early work through the Christian Baptist tended to be more restorationist and exclusivist, with stinging attacks on Protestant clergy. As he aged, he became more ecumenical, which could only have irritated the restorationist element within the movement. 
 Stone on the other hand began very ecumenical but became somewhat more sectarian later. The two men merged in the middle of their lives when their thinking was fairly similar. The ecumenical faction of the movement—The Disciples of Christ—is more in tune to Stone's early ecumenism. But the Church of Christ faction clung to a radicalized version of Campbell's Christian Baptist, never understanding Campbell's ecumenical intent. 
 Regarding the key issue of baptism for remission of sins, Campbell wavered, writing one way then another. He himself was never baptized for remission of sins. Stone came to believe in the doctrine, but never insisted on it as a test for Chrsitian fellowship—arguing over and over that, "To denounce all not immersed as lost, and to cut them off from salvation, however holy and pious they may be, appears to dethrone charity and forbearance from the breast." Were it otherwise, he declared, "countless millions of the fairest characters in the profession of Christianity for many centuries back, have been swept from joyful hope to gloomy despair." 
 The so-called "Plan of Salvation"—a term that does not appear in the Bible—but which is of utmost importance to the Church of Christ was developed by Walter Scott, an associate of Campbell. In trying to simplify the basic tenets of Christianity, Scott developed a short list of important concepts. The list actually had different configurations. An early configuration included: belief, repentance, immersion, forgiveness, the gift of the Holy Spirit, and eternal life. But he finally settled on a formula of five human tasks that could literally be counted on the five fingers of one hand: Hear the Gospel (i.e. Jesus is the Messiah), Believe the Gospel, Repent of One's Sins, Confess the Name of Jesus, and Be Baptized for the Forgiveness of Sins. These became the "terms for admission" into the true Church of Christ. Alexander Campbell spoke of Scott as "the first successful proclaimer of this ancient gospel." 
 Scott himself later became disappointed in the movement he helped found. He believed that people had taken his ideas too far. He felt the movement had become too sectarian and complained that many had become "theoretical to a hair-breadth, and proclaimers of water rather than of Christ," who "talk of baptism for the remission of sins, until every body is sick of it." He said, "When you express your doubts of the matters connected with the recent Reformation, I sympathize with you, for the thing has not been what I hoped it would be by a thousand miles. We are indeed 'a sect' differing but little, of anything that is good, from the parties around us. Alas! my soul is grieved every day." 
 But the second and third generations of the Restoration movement became increasingly sectarian. Here are some quotes: 
 Moses Lard (1818-1880): "I mean to say distinctly and emphatically that Martin Luther, if not immersed, was not a Christian." 
 John F. Rowe (1827-1897): "next to crude and coarse infidelity, we regard the support and propagation of the various denominations as the greatest and basest moral evil upon the earth—in fact it is a species of infidelity itself...." Complaining that students of Church of Christ colleges were being taught wrong doctrine, Rowe railed that the graduates could "see no difference between a Methodist and a Christian." 
 Benjamin Franklin (1812-1878): "To be sincere and conscientious as a Romanist, a Methodist, or a Quaker, is one question; to be a sincere and conscientious follower of Jesus Christ is entirely another question." 
 B. F. Hall (1803-1873): "I believe that the Holy Spirit exerts no influence on the heart of sinners over and above the word: that his influences are in the facts he has revealed in the gospel, the evidences by which he has confirmed the facts, and in the motives to obedience presented in the Scriptures of Truth." 
 Fanning Yater Tant (1908-1997): "There is not a Christian on this earth who is not a member of the church of Christ. There has never been one. There will never be one....De [sic] we mean that denominational people are not true Christians? We mean exactly that....Do we contend that among all the millions of Baptists, Lutherans, Catholics, Methodists, Presbyterians, and other denominational people on the earth there is not even one single, solitary faithful Christian? That is our contention." 
 By the latter part of the 1800's a wing of the Church of Christ—the radicalized Campbell faction—became so certain of their doctrinal interpretations as the only true way, that they began refusing fellowship with other professing Christians. The turning point of division came in 1889 with the Sand Creek Declaration. With this declaration, the elders of some Churches of Christ pronounced the sentence of "spiritual death" upon sister congregations over which they held not the slightest degree of jurisdiction (See chapter 12, Death of a Dream. Non-conformists were cut off without trial or appeal. People in the condemned congregations were given the "deep freeze" treatment by even former friends, and were branded as "traitor, heretic and apostate." Essentially, these people were disinherited from the family of God and were no longer recognized as his children. According to Ketcherside, the Sand Creek Declaration marked the beginning of the modern Church of Christ. 
 The doctrinal fights continued into the twentieth century. One major battle was over "millennial theories." The threat of premillennialism consumed the group during the first half of the century. This seems to have been an important issue because it threatened the notion that the Church of Christ was itself the restored church. This left no room for any possibility that Christ himself would come again to establish his reign—and thus the true church—on earth. (It had already been established by the Church of Christ.) Premillennialists have. Premillennialists have largely been purged from the Church of Christ (This purge was probably a correct thing to do, but for the wrong reasons) 
 Another huge issue has been the role of the Holy Spirit. Hughes relates in his book the story of how one scholar/preacher was essentially put on trial and driven from the pulpit. His trespass was to quote the New Testament that the Holy Spirit indwells the believer and is indeed active today. Even though the indwelling of the Holy Spirit is mentioned some 7 times in the New Testament, there was no room for debate on this issue. 
 Still another big issue is the one of instrumental music. This short biography of a figure in CC history is most fascinating and includes some of squabbles over this doctrine: Pinkerton. 
 "I love your website. My background includes 25 years in the Church of Christ. Wish I could have had this info during my time with them." ----Bobby, a visitor to our website 
 BIBLE QUESTIONS FOR THE CHURCH OF CHRIST 
 If you are a Church of Christ member, would you be willing to explain your views on these various matters? Faith Facts ministry specializes in theology, Christian evidences, world religions, and cults. We are interested in the beliefs of different Christian groups in order to understand them better. We would like to get the opinion of Church of Christ folks on these matters in order to clarify your views, and if your views stand up to the Bible, to help put other Christians on the correct (narrow) way. Since you are so well versed in the Bible, would you be willing to give us answers for the hope that lies within you (1 Peter 3:15)? Frankly, there are some things we find hard to understand and perhaps you can enlighten us. 
 Below is a list of questions that would help many understand your views on the Bible better. If your views have not been correctly given, please set the record straight. These questions and comments are rather tough and dig very deeply into the Bible and Church of Christ theology. You may have some difficulty with these questions. 
 As mentioned, there is a very wide range of views within the Church of Christ. Some would be considered mainstream within Christianity. We are addressing these questions to those within the Church of Christ who refuse fellowship with non-Church of Christ groups. However, we are interested in the experience of anyone who may have knowledge of the Church of Christ and invite you to email us. 
 So we hope you will give us your views on these things. These matters are truly important to millions of people who call themselves Christians; their eternal life in heaven or hell depends on understanding these things properly. So let's wrestle with these issues together. Spiritual truth is more important than "your pride or my pride." 
 You will notice that each section is numbered. Each number may actually contain more than one question. If you will allow us to study with you, please take the questions in order, one number at a time. Please do not skip any questions and please read the links that are associated with the questions. The links are integral to the questions. Email them to mail@faithfacts.org referring to the section and number. Thanks! 
 We are appreciative of a few Church of Christ folks, including preachers, who have taken the time to answer a few of our questions. Indeed, we have been satisfied with many of the answers and have removed those questions from the list. But we still have many more questions that no one has been able to answer. This has increased our concern that they are unanswerable by those in the Church of Christ. 
 May this dialogue be taken in love and not in scorn, that iron may sharpen iron. We claim no exclusive knowledge except as the Bible teaches. We always welcome our brothers' views. 
 "I was raised in the Church of Christ and always assumed that the way the Christian faith was presented there was biblically sound. But a girlfriend in high school shared the gospel with me. I had never heard that the gospel was actually something that God did for me. I had been taught, or at least I inferred, that the gospel was something that I did for God." ----Susan 
 1. Doesn’t 1 Cor 15:1-11 give the clearest and principle definition of the gospel as being something to be believed about Christ dying for our sins? Doesn’t gospel mean “good news  in Greek (as the ancients used the word for events such as the birth of an emperor or a major military victory)? We fear that a non-believer visiting a Church of Christ and hearing that the "good news" is a list of things that they have to do, would not see it as good news. Is it not ultimately found in the grace of God (Acts 20:24 and Col 1:3-6)? 
 2. According to Rom 1:16 and 1 Cor 1:18, by whose power is the gospel—God's or man's? Don't these passages teach that the gospel is the power of God unto salvation, not the power of man? 
 3. Doesn't the Bible specifically separate baptism from the Gospel in 1 Cor 1:17? 
 4. Our understanding is that a "gospel sermon" given by a Church of Christ preacher would be about the formula of what one must do to be saved: Hear/Believe/Repent/Confess/Be Baptized. If you reject the claim made by Church of Christ preacher K. C. Moser that the CC is guilty of preaching "The Plan" rather than "The Man"—why is he incorrect? 
 5. Please take a look at these articles by 3 Church of Christ preachers: Carl Ketcherside, chapter 28 Two Great Errors, Leroy Garrett, chapter 10 What is the Gospel also chapter 33 Is Doctrine Important, and Cecil Hook chapter 8 Gospel and Doctrine. Would you agree with the distinction between preaching and teaching, between gospel and doctrine, between fact and interpretation? Isn't the gospel simply a proclamation of good news that one accepts or rejects? Didn't even the apostles have different opinions and emphases on doctrine; thus Peter said of Paul's teaching, "There are some things in them that are hard to understand."? Are you confusing law and gospel? (The point of this section is that the gospel is something to be believed and is to be preached to non-believers. Matters of obedience are taught to those who are already Christians.) 
 6. Leroy Garrett further clarifies what the gospel is: "Surely we can see that Jesus was referring to a specific message, a proclamation of certain heavenly facts to be believed. This is why Paul in 1 Cor 1:21 spoke of the gospel as 'the thing preached.' This is why he could speak of 'obeying the gospel,' for the gospel is one thing and obeying it is something else. This is why he could refer to 'the defense and confirmation of the gospel,' for the gospel is one thing, while to defend it and confirm it are something else." Isn't the gospel one thing, and obeying it something else? 
 7. Just what is the gospel that Paul preached (1 Cor 15:1-8; 1 Cor 2:2; 2 Cor 4:4-6; Rom 1:16-17)? Do you preach the gospel Paul preached? Are you resolved to focus on preaching Christ crucified as Paul did, or do you preach yourselves and your works and another gospel? 
 8. Isn't the gospel described in 1 Cor 15:1-38 as something that is past tense (Christ's dying for our sins) rather than a list of things that we must do now? Were you redeemed by your acts of obedience or by the precious blood of Jesus Christ (1 Pet 1:18-19). 
 9. So what about the term obey the gospel (Rom 10:16; 2 Thes 1:8; 2 Pet 4:17)? The word for obey that Paul uses in the first two of these verses is the Greek word hupakouo, which is defined in Strong's Concordance as "to hear under (as a subordinate), i.e. to listen attentively; by impl. to heed or conform to a command or authority—hearken, be obedient to, obey" (emphasis ours). Thus, the phrase is translated in some modern translations as "welcome the gospel" (or potentially harken the gospel or heed the gospel), or in the negative "refuse the gospel." In other words, what Paul is saying here is something like a parent would say to a child, "You better listen up buster!" While there are implications of obedience, that is not the force of his statement. The force of the statement is to "pay attention." Thus, we argue that this is yet another factor in favor of seeing obedience as a result of the gospel rather than the gospel itself. Does this new information change your thinking at all between the distinction between the gospel itself and obedience? Please read this short article and give us your response: Gospel. 
 10. Where in the Bible is "obeying the gospel" equated with being baptized? 
 11. Is it true that the CC teaches that the gospel was not preached before Pentecost? Do not these passages show that it was in fact preached before Pentecost: Mat 11:5, Mark 1:14-15, Luke 20:1, Rev 14:6? 
 This distinction between gospel and doctrine, between gospel and obedience, is crucial and seems clear to most Christians except certain modern CC parties. The founders of the Restoration Movement certainly understood the distinction. And the founders of the Protestant Reformation clearly understood the difference as they insisted on a distinction between, as they put it, gospel and law. This helps us understand why Alexander Campbell taught that we should consider as brothers even those new Christians who may not fully understand all of the details of Christian doctrine, or indeed even those who may have legitimate disagreements as to interpretation—and even those who err out of weakness or misunderstanding as we all do. Thus, the basis of unity should be gospel, rather than doctrine. Ketcherside said, "This [distinction] does havoc to what many of us have been calling 'gospel sermons.' Campbell said that a clear, scriptural sermon on faith, repentance and baptism is not gospel preaching. It may of course be truth, and even related to the gospel, and yet not be the gospel." 
 In the spirit of the Restoration Movement, the focus of the remaining questions below is to try to establish that there are valid differences of opinions among sincere Christians, even as to important doctrines. (Perhaps God wanted it to be that way in order to enrich our faith experience and learn to live together as believers.) 
 These questions will probably generate some strong reactions. Leroy Garrett says that in the days of his sectarian understanding of these things, he "never lost a debate" in his own mind. Garrett and others like him say that it was only after fully understanding God's love that he could truly put aside his party spirit to experience joy in the diverse opinions of his brothers —and with that a great burden was lifted from him. Even more than exploring what is the "best fit" interpretations of Scripture, we hope to demonstrate to all fellow believers in Christ that we ought naught to restrict our fellowship to those who are closest to us in doctrine. 
 "I knew within my heart that something was not right with the way we dealt with each other as Christians. Hostility, jealousy, judging, ostracizing, and the like abounded. All of these were being practiced [in the church of Christ]. Grace and love were very rare. As I began to read and study, I realized that for about thirty years I had been duped, misled and brainwashed. I could not believe the magnitude of this deception. As the scales began falling from my eyes, I began to see more and more clearly, and I grew more and more angry. I have harbored a lot of resentment in my heart since my eyes were opened. But lately, thanks be to God, I have been able to let it go." -----(testimony of a Church of Christ sister. For the rest of her testimony see Ashamed.) 
 Basis for Unity 
 1. Is it true that the CC believes that it alone is "the New Testament church?" Apparently only Churches of Christ—and only some of them (!)—qualify to be included in the "church of Christ." Is it correct that members of other Christian denominations cannot be saved if they remain in those groups (or that saved members of other denominations would surely leave those groups in time)? Yet is it also correct, as Cecil Hook says, that there is disagreement among CC members on some 100 issues: chapter 1, Issues Before Us? There are some important issues on this list, including matters of life and death—war, abortion, euthanasia. Is it fair to ask this question: How can one be sure of his salvation if there is disagreement about what one must believe and do? 
 2. Members of the CC ask, "How can we accept professing Christians who are in error?" Given the diversity of opinion within your own group, every one of the group must be in error on some things, right? Is unity to be defined as getting people into a non-instrumental congregation and wearing the revered name of Church of Christ? Is the message that you proclaim intending to promote unity itself divisive? 
 3. Stone and Campbell’s original concept was to foster unity within the church. They recognized that even the apostles had disagreements, but in love they could remain united. How do you respond to Leroy Garrett's charge that the CC has "rediscovered the horrid sin of partyism"—the pride of being right and exclusive and superior with an "arrogant demand for conformity." Isn't partyism such a horrible sin that it can prevent one from reaching the kingdom of God (Gal 5:20-21)? 
 4. Garrett says, (chapter 46, Separated) "We do not work for unity; we rather accept the Spirit's gift of unity to the church. We are already united with all those who are in Christ." If he is mistaken, what do the many passages on unity mean (Jn 17:20-23, Rom 15:5-7, 1 Cor 1:10-12, Eph 1:10, Eph 4:1-16, Php 1:27, Col 3:11-16)? Is it a sin to fail to be in spiritual unity with your Christian brothers on the gospel—one fact of Christ? 
 5. Ferguson says, "There is no place for a diversity born of party spirit. Division is a denial of salvation, since the goal of Ephesians 1:10 is uniting all in Christ. Saying that these things are not enough to unite people is a denial of the fundamentals of Christianity." He reminds his brothers in the CC "not to be too quick to draw lines of fellowship or division....as the church will never be perfect; otherwise there would be not need for the life, death, and resurrection of Christ and no need for human history." 
 6. The basis for unity for the CC are both (a) the New Testament, and (b) the New Testament church. That sounds like a reasonable thing for Christians. But Garrett makes an interesting point that perhaps these are, in fact, contradictory goals (chapter 44, Fallacy)! He points out that the New Testament church itself was not modeled after the New Testament! They did not have the New Testament! 
 7. So if we are to use a model of unity based on the New Testament church, shouldn't our unity be based on what theirs was—the fundamental facts of the gospel? Could Garrett be correct that there was no such thing among the early Christians as a formal union upon the "Bible alone?" In fact, isn't he correct that, "If unity is a matter of seeing the Bible eye-to-eye, then believers will never be united, for they never have and never will see the Bible alike (chapter 51, Unifying)." 
 8. Obviously, a line must be drawn somewhere since everyone is not a Christian. But we must not draw a line where the Bible does not draw a line. Wasn't the unity of the New Testament church what Paul says in 1 Cor 1, with "all those in who in every place call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ?" 
 9. To what extent can we pass judgment on another? What does Paul mean in Romans 14:4: "Who are you to pass judgment on the servant of another? It is before his own master that he stands or falls."? 
 10. Is the CC ever a “stumbling block  to the gospel? Do those who hear this emphasis on law and guilt ever “perish of thirst beside what should have been a refreshing pool of the water of life (chapter 17, Mortality Rate)?" 
 11. Apparently the CC spends a good bit of time studying other groups' theology in order to condemn what they see as egregious errors. And labels are attached such as "sectarian," "liberal," "ultra-conservative," "heretic," "not sound in the faith," "not of us," "dishonest," or "institutional," or an "anti" or an "extremist." Such labels are put on denominational churches as well as sister Churches of Christ. Ketcherside insisted that the apostle Paul would vehemently reject such labels, and said, "Unless our brethren are transformed by the Spirit and renounce their false premise they are destined to become the most narrow and antagonistic sectarians of our age." 
 Let us emphatically assert that such sectarian feelings are not unique to the CC! We have enough experience with denominations to know that many in the denominational world see themselves as members of the denomination first and as Christians second. They are bound by inbred traditions and uninspired creeds which they feel a necessity to defend. Lengthy confessional statements are the way that many organizations put a straight jacket on pastors, teachers, and lay leaders. But, unlike the CC, most will allow fellowship and communion with those outside the denomination and certainly consider others as true Christians. 
 12. Some say that what the CC really means by “unity on the Bible  is to follow their particular view of things, including no instrumental music, gospel plan, Bible name, weekly communion, ruling elder church government, etc. Is it correct that your answer to division is for everyone else to line up with you, as Leroy Garrett claims? Isn't there a difference between unity and uniformity? In other words, can't we have unity without uniformity? We hear from CC people that they will fully accept anyone who "repents." But what seems to be meant by repent is to forsake non-CC views and come on over. What did Paul mean in Romans 14:18-19? Does it mean that whoever serves Christ in the way you think they should is "acceptable to God?" Or what did Jesus mean when in Mark 9:38-51: 
 “John said to him, ‘Teacher, we saw a man casting out demons in your name, and we forbade him, because he was not following us.’ But Jesus said, ‘Do not forbid him; for no one who does a mighty work in my name will be able soon after to speak evil of me. For he that is not against us is for us. For truly, I say to you, whoever gives you a cup of water to drink because you bear the name of Christ, will by no means lose his reward.  
 13. Jesus said "By this all men will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another (John 13:35). Ketcherside says (chapter 50, Glory), "It is not by being baptized or by faithfully attending services that the world will be impressed, nor by being right or doctrinally sound. It is rather the magnificent Christian dynamic of love that will press the claims of Jesus upon men's conscience." 
 Fellowship 
 As an introduction, please watch this video from a CC preacher about divisions in the Restoration Movement: Divisions. 
 One respondent to our article said this: "Those erring members of the church who refuse to grow out of false teachings and grow into a knowledge of and submission to the Truth are to be rejected, not tolerated." Of course, what is meant here by Truth is truth as the Church of Christ understands it. 
 1. Is it correct that CC will not fellowship with Christians who are "in error?" Is there any other kind of Christian? In other words, since CC members both acknowledge their own sin and disagree on so many points among themselves, is it not correct that each member of the Church of Christ must be in error on at least some points? 
 2. Is it correct that in some cities there are as many as half a dozen different groups of Churches of Christ, none of which will fellowship with the others? 
 3. Isn't Ketcherside correct when he says "All of this talk about 'full fellowship' is sheer poppycock. It is wholly without scriptural warrant and has been conjured up...God has no stepchildren so we can have no half-brothers. If we are in his family we are in it wholly or not at all. The idea that you can be in partial fellowship is like loving the right side of your wife and hating the left side. You cannot parcel God out and you cannot carve up his spiritual offspring either (chapter 15, Authority)". 
 4. Ketcherside clarified that, "Harmony is not essential to fellowship, but is a goal of those who are in fellowship....There is no passage in the apostolic doctrine commanding harmony which was written to bring the saints into fellowship. Every such passage was written to those who were in the fellowship and because they were in it. Please consider (chapter 24, Fellowship)." Does fellowship require the endorsement of another's position or views? Are people in fellowship by being called by God through the Good News of Jesus Christ or some other means? 
 5. Garrett and Ketcherside challenge the usual CC interpretation of certain proof texts for disfellowship. For example, 2 Thes 3:6 says to "withdraw from every brother who walks disorderly and not according to the tradition which he received from us." First of all, the verse implies that those so identified are still brothers. It does not say to disfellowship from them. Please read what Garrett has to say: chapter 26, Disorderly. He explains that the context of this passage is the urgent expectation of the expected Second Coming (mentioned regularly in 1st and 2nd Thes) in which some brothers were not bearing their load. Paul says that those who did not work should not eat (2 Thes 3:10), and that the church should discourage this freeloading by not being a party to it. As this is no doubt a different interpretation than you have been taught, your comments are welcome. 
 6. Another such proof text is Rom 16:17, which says to avoid those who cause division contrary to what they had been taught. Ketcherside is of the view that some have turned this passage into a meaning exactly opposite to its intent. What had they been taught? Hadn't they been taught to love one another, not to dispute over opinions, and to live in harmony? (See Rom 12, 13, and 14, etc). Ketcherside says that "Without realizing it, every partisan who has ever used Romans 16:17, to justify his pet division, and condone his unwritten creed, has pronounced his own condemnation by quoting this verse (chapter 27, Divisions)!" 
 7. What do you think of Leroy Garrett's statements regarding 1 John 1:1-4, "If we use fellowship to refer to anything less than the one, holy, catholic, apostolic church throughout the world, we are using it in a sectarian sense. There is no such thing as 'our fellowship' except in terms of a sect." And, "True, one may not approve or endorse what some denomination teaches or practices, but this has little or nothing to do with fellowship, which is a relationship that exists between a person and God and with other persons (chapter 42, Christian Church)." 
 8. Isn't it correct that even Alexander Campbell himself would not be accepted in many Churches of Christ today since he did not believe that baptism was absolutely essential for salvation, was not himself baptized for the remission of sins, believed that there were Christians in the sects, and served for some sixteen years as president of the first CC missionary society? And Thomas Campbell could not be fellowshipped for the most of the same reasons and also because he was a Calvinist in his theology? 
 9. Al Maxey has challenged CC members for decades to provide a specific list of fellowship/salvation issues (Fellowship). We too would like to see such a list. Please email it to us. 
 1. Based on the responses, this essay is one of Al Maxey's biggest hits. Please read Maxey on The Universal Body and offer your critique. 
 2. Are we saved by the Church of Christ, or the Christ of the church? 
 3. Walter Scott in the preface of his book, The Gospel Restored, said: "In 1827 the True Gospel was restored. For distinction's sake, it was styled the Ancient Gospel." In a more recent Church of Christ tract, the writer says: "She [the church] was HIDDEN for 1260 years, that she might be protected from the power of the Popes." Is it true that some within the CC still teach that the true church was really completely hidden for some 1260 years, so hidden in fact that Alexander Campbell had to find a Baptist preacher to baptize him? 
 4. Apparently not all CC people have this understanding of the 1260 year church gap. Some only say that the true church existed during those 1260 years, although believers had to worship in secret lest they be persecuted by the apostate Catholic church. But if you do hold to the gap view, what is the meaning of Mat 28:20 (“And lo, I am with you all the days, even unto the end of the age. )? And Ephesians 3:21 (“Unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end. ) If the church was in apostasy for centuries, why does Jesus say, “The gates of hell shall not prevail against it ? 
 5. Is it correct that sometimes the CC considers Christians who "do not walk with you," as Ketcherside claims (chapter 22, Butting Brethren) to be "hobbyists, or dishonest, or insincere, or sectarians, or unworthy of notice?" Did Jesus die for a particular party within Christendom? Do you know precisely where God would draw the line to eliminate certain people from being considered Christians? How would you define "sect?" 
 6. Hasn’t the church always been in need of reform and restoration—even from the beginning, as evidenced by Paul’ letters to his churches? If a man loses his leg, doesn’t he still have the essential nature of a man? If the church loses some correct practices, doesn’t it still have the essential nature of a church (chapter 19, Identity)? 
 7. The concept of the restoration of the true church is a view that the CC holds in common with Mormons and Jehovah's Witnesses. If the church only existed in “seed  (meaning the Word) as you say during this church gap period, wherein the “seed  does it prophecy that Alexander Campbell and his followers would restore the church? Or where in the “seed  does it authorize anyone to restore the church? 
 8. Is it fair to accuse other Christians groups of having been started by men, when history clearly shows that the Church of Christ was started by men—Thomas and Alexander Campbell on May 4, 1811? 
 "Brother Al, I wanted to tell you how much my husband and I appreciate your efforts toward bringing unity among all believers through your preaching and teaching, and especially through your Reflections articles. We pray that God will bless you richly in this effort. We were raised up in the "conservative" church, and had been members of our local congregation for almost 30 years. After becoming frustrated with all the division, mean-spiritedness, bitterness and anger, we decided to start meeting in our home with other members of our immediate family. My husband and brother-in-law found several web sites that we began to visit regularly --- those maintained by Carl Ketcherside, Edward Fudge and Al Maxey. We have also been attending a "non-denominational church" here some, and we've heard excellent lessons on GRACE --- a subject that I had never, ever heard a sermon on!! My husband leaned over at one point during one of those lessons and said, "Why did I have to wait 45 years to hear this?!" It has been so refreshing to hear about our freedom in Christ. We have never been so happy in our Christian lives. I genuinely believe that we had been "brainwashed," in a sense, not having been exposed to anything but the dogmas of the Church of Christ. Brother Al, thank you so much for your help!!" ----a response to Al Maxey's Reflections email newsletter 
 A study of CC doctrine is, of course, not complete without a look at instrumental music! The non-instrumental music wing of the CC feels so strongly about this that they will not fellowship with churches who use instrumental music, saying "We don't fellowship the instrument." 
 A cappella singing is wonderful and most worshipful! The concern is why this issue would cause folks to break fellowship with other Christians. 
 1. Why is instrumental music not allowed in worship when the definition of psalm (which you do allow) is a hymn set to instrumental music (see Strong’s Dictionary of the Greek New Testament, as well as any English dictionary)? Since psalms are included in a proper worship (Ephesians 5:19), shouldn’t instrumental music necessarily be used in worship to be obedient to Scripture? Is it being disobedient to Paul’s instruction by not using psalms correctly in the worship service? In other words, given the definition of psalm, by your own rules of "inclusion and exclusion," doesn’t the Bible require instrumental music? 
 2. In fact, don't all three words used in Ephesians 5:19 (psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs) include musical instruments in their definition? Go to to the online Blue Letter Bible to Ephesians 5:19 and look up the meanings, including synonyms, of each word: Blue Letter Bible. 
 3. Aren’t there instruments of music in worship to God in heaven (Rev 5:8)? Aren’t there instruments of music in worship in the Old Testament? Is there any condemnation of instruments of music anywhere in the Bible? While there are many Psalms quoted in the New Testament, why are there no statements of caution to make sure to not obey the musical instrument passages in the Psalms? Is this practice from the Word of God or is it a tradition of men? Is it really so important as to break fellowship with other Christians? 
 4. Is there a single solitary sentence anywhere in all of Scripture that even hints of God's disapproval of instrumental accompaniment to singing (Maxey on Pinkerton). 
 5. It seems to us that the Church of Christ is desperately inconsistent in interpreting the Bible. If necessary to prove a point, the CC calls on the Old Testament. Examples: In order to try to disprove Original Sin, you call on Ezekiel 18:19-32. If you want to support patternism, you call on Leviticus 10:1-2. Aside from both of the passages taken out of context to prove a point, why do you conveniently ignore the Old Testament passages about instrumental music? 
 "You cannot believe how comforting and informative your site has been to me. I was raised 3rd generation church of Christ, attended services 3 times a week, went to teen devotionals, youth rallies, etc.—and even attended a school supported by the churches of Christ. All my life I have loved the Lord and believed many of the things they teach. However, there were also things I questioned and remained confused over. Music in the church—why did God like us to worship Him that way in the O.T. and have it in heaven, but condemn it now? The Holy Spirit was something else that was never explained like I read in the Bible. I was always concerned with being good so I could get to heaven and tried my best to obey all the commands, but worried and lost sleep because I knew I wasn't doing everything right. I knew Jesus died for our sins, but didn't realize what justification and grace really were. Thank God, I met someone who took the time to speak with me patiently and show me truths from Scripture that I never understood. It was hard to get through to me in some things because of my complete immersion into the beliefs of the church of Christ. I cried tears of joy when I finally realized what the gospel really says and that it is all about HIM and that I cannot earn my way there, but have to believe in Christ and what He accomplished on the cross—and that he would help complete the work in me. Finally, I understood perfect love casts out fear." ----from Laura, a visitor to our website 
 A Church of Christ website makes the statement that, "One becomes a Catholic differently than one becomes a Christian. The two are not synonymous. Likewise, becoming a Baptist is incompatible with becoming a Christian. These and other denominational groups are not segments of Christianity; they are all different from Biblical Christianity." 
 1. The CC says that denominationalism is bad, should be shunned and abandoned —a goal which may be worthy as denominationalism does unnecessarily separate Christians. But Webster gives these definitions of a denomination: (1) act of denominating or naming, (2) a name, designation, or title, (3) a class, or society of individuals, called by the same name; a sect. Is not the CC a denomination on every one of these points? Has the CC, perhaps with good intention, added to the denominational problem by using the Church of Christ name exclusively (chapter 11, Denominate Ourselves)? 
 2. Is it true that if one is truly seeking to please God that he must wear a name "approved by God?" CC materials say that, “Investigate and be a member of no church but the one you can read about in the Bible.  Are we correct in inferring that this limits one to the Church of Christ? Does this mean that those who "wear a name" such as Methodist or Baptist should be condemned and disfellowshipped? Could the insistence on the name be a tradition of men rather than from God, as Cecil Hook suggests: chapter 12, Sectarianism? 
 3. Has the CC assumed a sectarian spirit with the exclusive use of this name? If it is important for the group to be titled biblically, while Church of Christ seems like a good name, why not sometimes use the following terms that the Bible says of the church—the “Churches of God in Christ Jesus  (2 Thes 14), or “Church of God  (Acts 20:28, 1 Cor 15:9), or “The Way  (Acts 9:2, 16:17, 18:25-26, 19:9,23, 22:4, 24:14, 22, 2 Peter 2:2), or “Bride  (John 3:29). Or—the “Pillar and the Ground,  “The Body,  “Temple,  “Building,  “Household Flock,  “City,  “Candlestick of Christ,  “Churches (plural) of Christ,  “Sheep,  “Elect,  “Living Stones —all of which are used in the Bible for the church or for God’s people? Does the Bible in ANY place command to use a definite, specific name consistent for the church? Were the many churches in the New Testament that were not called by the name of Church of Christ saved or lost? Indeed, isn't it correct that no individual congregation is called Church of Christ in the New Testament? 
 4. The word translated church (Greek ekklesia) is used in the New Testament only in 1 Cor 11:20 and Rev 1:10, and it means “belonging to the Lord; pertaining to the Lord.  Cecil Hook asks several questions of his brethren in his book about this (chapter 11, Denominate Ourselves). For example, how could a word which has a limited counterpart in the New Testament be a part of an authorized title for God’s people? 
 5. The Bible (Acts 11:26) says that Christians were first called “Christians  in Antioch, eleven years after Pentecost when CC claims the church began. Were the followers of Christ truly Christian during these intervening eleven years? Were any of them saved before they got a name? Isn’t this a long time for a bride to take on her husband’s name? Why wasn’t the name “Church of Christ  used? 
 "I, like most in the churches of Christ, was raised up on the notion that we must "restore" the first century church to present day America. It was something I never questioned, and just assumed (like most) that it was a biblical concept and goal. However, some years back I began a personal quest to confirm my beliefs, and I soon learned that many of my cherished convictions came more from my forefathers in the faith than from my Faithful Father! This notion of restoration of the first century church is one of them, in my view." ----Al Maxey 
 We have been told by a CC preacher that what unites the Church of Christ is hermeneutics (method of biblical interpretation) more than anything else. The formula used is "specific commandments, approved apostolic examples, and necessary inferences." This is further clarified by the rule of "inclusions and exclusions." This means, as we understand, that anything that is included in the New Testament must be obeyed; and anything that is not in the New Testament must be avoided, except those things which are deemed to be required or avoided by necessary inference. When they see other groups who fail these tests as they define them, they accuse them of practicing things that are "traditions of men rather than the word of God." But are these formulas themselves traditions of men rather than the word of God? 
 1. Is there such a thing as Church of Christ doctrine? Here's a testimony of a Church of Christ preacher who, after for 40 years changed his mind on this: Church of Christ Doctrine. 
 2. How do you know that biblical silence is prohibitive rather than permissive? Maxey on Silence. In this article, Maxey discusses the three most used Bible passages that are used to prove the "Law of Silence." Your thoughts on this would be appreciated. 
 3. What about the so-called "Law of Silence" or the "Principle of Prohibitive Silence"—that is, not doing what the Bible is silent on? Isn't this actually a fallacious principle, as pointed out by Church of Christ preacher Al Maxey: http://www.zianet.com/maxey/reflx354.htm? Isn't Maxey on to something when he insists that in the areas in which God has said nothing, that this is NOT PROHIBITIVE? Where in the Bible is this "law of silence" enumerated? Could you give us a list of truths that God has revealed to his people by saying absolutely nothing about them? 
 4. Consider this example. Let's say that a father has prescribed list of things for his children to do and not to do to honor him. He is insistent that he is to receive a greeting card on his birthday. They are to kiss him good night each evening. They are never to speak ill of him. But let's say his daughter loves him so much that one day she picks a bouquet of wildflowers and gives it to him—an act that is not on the father's list. Is she to be condemned or chastised for this act of love? Aren't there innumerable ways to honor God out of our love which are not specifically mentioned in the Bible (chapter 15, Worship by Demand)? Maybe, just maybe, playing beautiful instrumental music in church might fit into this category! Did you know that there is in fact NO pattern to worship in the Bible (chapter 26 beginning on page 91, Sickness). 
 5. Isn't the Bible silent on many things which Churches of Christ do or use: church buildings, "placing membership," plan of salvation, shaped notes, four-part harmony, audio and visual equipment, "five acts of worship," worship leaders, located preachers, youth director, campus ministers, pitch pipes, tuning forks, Sunday school, greeters, ushers, collection plate, invitations song, church budget, pledge cards, "laying contributions at the elders' feet," prohibitions against helping community organizations, song leader, grape juice, auditorium, etc? Nothing wrong with these, for sure. But they are indeed traditions, no? 
 6. Cecil Hook documents in his books Free to Change (chapter 33 beginning on page 113) and Free as Sons (chapter 20 beginning on page 56, Pattern) that: "Let's Face It: None of us is willing to follow those three rules consistently. We accept what seems to fit our understanding, and we reject or overlook teachings of the same classification that do not fit our mental picture." How about taking a minute to read the articles on these links. So we ask, is the pattern you seek in church not there after all? Is Hook correct that patternism is evidence of legalism? Does such patternism subtract from the focus on Christ? 
 7. What is the vital factor which God sees to be known by him? Is it loving God (1 Cor 8:2-3 f) or the code of rules that you suppose to be the law of Christ? If patternism is so important, why do you limit your patterns to the book of Acts? Why not follow the pattern of Jesus, who consistently tended to the weak, sick, and needy? 
 8. What is the core message of the Bible? Is it, as Abilene Christian and Pepperdine professor Thomas Olbricht insists that it is: the "mighty acts of God" and "God, Christ, and the Holy Spirit?" Or is it rather "commands, examples, and necessary inferences?" Should it not be the faith, hope, and love realized in the lives of believers through the power and grace of God? 
 9. These formulas bring up a long list of questions that we might ask, especially regarding necessary inferences. It seems that what is a necessary inference varies even among CC folks. But suffice it to wonder whether a "necessary" inference becomes any doctrine or practice that someone in the Church of Christ deems necessary (or whether the formula is a necessary tool to exclude many other Christians and Christian practices). Since these formulas are not specific commands in the New Testament and since "necessary" seems to be merely an interpretation, shouldn't others necessarily infer that these formulas themselves are traditions of men rather than the word of God? See Al Maxey's comments on Necessary Inference. 
 10. Are examples and incidental details in the Bible binding? How does one answer the issues raised by Mr. Hook’s explanation on this: chapter 2, Law and Principle? Is it the detail or the purpose that is important, such as at the Lord's Table? Is it correct to assume that breaking bread on the first day of the week (Acts 20:7f) is binding? Remembering that the Jewish day was from sundown to sundown, and since this gathering in Acts 20:7 was at night, it had to be on what we know as Saturday night. Is the CC's insistence on a Sunday Communion therefore breaking this New Testament example? Since that was the only such instance in the New Testament, how can one be certain to the point of law that this was not an isolated example? How can you even be certain that this was Communion rather than a fellowship meal? Would Jesus pronounce a woe on such sacred cows? 
 11. And a bit more on the notion of "Patternism," that is, the idea that we MUST follow the pattern of the disciples as found in the book of Acts. Where in the Bible is this command found? Cecil Hook demonstrates that the proof text of Heb 8:5 is misplaced (chapter 20 beginning on page 56, Pattern). We would be interested in your comments on this reference and also from Al Maxey: Patternism. 
 Church of Christ folks love debates. Here is a great one, a debate on patternism: Maxey vs. Broking. 
 12. Do you really think that you are following the New Testament pattern? Well, let's just do a little check. Are you following all of these New Testament patterns? Or are you arbitrarily assigning reasons why some should not be followed? 
 Do you allow speaking in tongues? (1 Cor 14:39) 
 Do all who believe have all things in common? Do you sell your possessions and belongings and distributing the proceeds to all, as any had need. (Acts 2:44-45) 
 Do you greet one another with a holy kiss. (Rom 16:16; 1 Cor 16:20; 2 Cor 13:12; 1 Thes 5:26; 1 Peter 5:14) 
 Does every wife who prays or prophecies do so with her head covered? (1 Cor 11:5) 
 Do you wash one another's feet. (John 13:14, et. al.) See Pedilavium. 
 Do you have Deaconesses (Romans 16:1) 
 Do you anoint with oil, lay on hands, etc, etc.? 
 Do you in every place lift holy hands when you pray (1 Tim 2:8)? 
 13. On the other hand, do you show patterns that are not in Scripture, such as weddings, funerals, election of elders, business meetings, thrice weekly meetings at church, and so forth? Are elders given authority to ordain scruples and standards and to withdraw from those who do not comply? If so, isn't this contrary to the warning of Jesus, "You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them. It shall not be so among you... " (Mat 20:25-26). See chapter 23 beginning on page 81, Route to Heaven. 
 14. What about methods of carrying on church business and of selecting of elders—are such laid out in the Bible (chapter 22, Organization, and chapter 23, Autonomous)? Are accepted practices really from the word of God, or are they traditions of men? 
 15. Edward Fudge argues that Hebrews 8:1-6 is not suggesting that Christians keep patterns, but in fact the writer of Hebrews is making a contrast with the Christian order (Fudge on Patternism). Indeed, Fudge further argues that patternism is a tradition of men rather than the word of God. Please offer your rebuttal. 
 16. The Church of Christ also teaches that tradition is to be avoided based on Mat 15:2-6 and Mk 7:3-13. But doesn't the Bible itself teach that there are verbal traditions to which one must hold (2 Thes 2:15)? If it is not okay to use tradition in the Christian faith, how do we even know who wrote the first book of the New Testament? While the Bible contains all truth, is all truth in the Bible? Isn't it reasonable to think that there are as many ways to honor God as his infinite nature would imply? 
 17. Is our sufficiency in a written code in the New Testament, or rather in the Spirit (2 Corinthians 3:6)? Do we have eternal life via the Scriptures or simply in Jesus (John 5:39)? 
 18. How does one answer the following charge made by Bob Ross in his book Campbellism; It’s Histories and Heresies: “Campbellism is salvation by works because it requires one to obey—in order to be saved—a ‘gospel plan’ that in order requires (a) faith, repentance, good confession, baptism, remission of sins, and the Holy Spirit—thus requires a sacramental ordinance, and (b) requires the assistance of another person [“priest ] and thus the obedience of the one assisting.  Is this construct a tradition of man rather a commandment of God? 
 Works Righteousness and Legalism versus Imputed Righteousness 
 "I've tried my entire life to keep all the rules and was so deadened staring at a mean, vindictive God who handed out more rules for 'comfort'." ----a Church of Christ sister in Phoenix 
 "What started me questioning my church of Christ theology was when my uncle preached a sermon on 'the point of no return.' He told the entire youth group that you can sin so badly you can go to hell, and Jesus' blood doesn't cover you. Imagine hearing that at fifteen years old. For two years I would cry myself to sleep I was so scared. But Jesus has opened my eyes!" -----Andrea, a visitor to our website 
 First, some comments about this topic, then the questions. 
 The CC seems to think that other professing Christians are lax in obedience. That may be so. A true saving faith must be a living faith (James 2). There is little room in the Christian faith for "easy-believism" which could be defined as turning one's back on clearly understood biblical instruction. Certainly, the believer should seek to conform his life to the will of God as best as he understands it. Faith implies faithfulness. The New Testament speaks often of such concepts as the obedience of faith. The protestant reformers put it this way: Salvation is through faith alone, but not through a faith that is alone. So, we stand with you in attempting to overcome the shallow view of easy-believism in Christianity. 
 As we will point out below, we get conflicting opinions from Church of Christ folks that visit our website. Some insist that we are saved only by grace and then go on to explain that our obedience is required to earn God's grace. Others flatly say that we do not even need the righteousness of Christ at all to be saved. 
 So we conclude that the Church of Christ misunderstands the biblical concept of justification. Justification is the process by which God declares us righteous even though we are not! Put another way, justification is the authoritative declaration that a person's status is changed. As theologian Sinclair Ferguson says in his short but powerful book The Christian Life: A Doctrinal Introduction, "God does not justify us because of what we are or what we have done. The whole point of Paul's argument in Romans 1:18-3:20 is to demonstrate the sheer impossibility of such an event. Rather than justification, it is divine wrath which man has merited." 
 Ferguson continues: "The only basis for justification which the New Testament recognizes is the work of Christ....The love of God is the source of our justification, but the death of Christ is its grounds. We 'have now been justified by his blood' (Romans 5:9); the result of his obedient life and death is our justification (Romans 5:18); just as he was delivered over to death for our sins he was raised for our justification (Roman 4:25)....and 'through the obedience of the one man (Christ) the many will be made righteous' (Romans 5:19)....He [Jesus] came voluntarily under the curse of God, in order to set us at liberty from it (cf. 2 Corinthians 5:21; Galatians 3:13-14)." 
 Ferguson further reminds us that even the Old Testament saints were not justified by works of the law: "The law was introduced 430 years after Abraham had received God's promise and was justified by faith! In fact, the Law was 'added' (Galatians 3:19), it 'came in by the side door' Romans 5:20), and was given in order to make men see how necessary dependence on the promise of justification is!" 
 Indeed, Ferguson clarifies that indeed it is not even because of faith that we are justified—faith being merely the instrument or the channel (Romans 4:16; Ephesians 2:8-9). We are saved by grace. The conclusion must be that if a man is justified by grace, it is impossible that he be justified by works of any kind. Just as Abraham was not justified by any work of the Law, neither are we today justified by any "Law of Christ" which is a set of rules that replaces the Old Covenant. 
 In trying to explain the impossibility of adding works to grace for justification, it is argued that those accepting Church of Christ theology are not doing ENOUGH to satisfy God! How so? Tim Keller in his book The Reason for God explains how a legalist he knows came to understand the problem. He says that a certain young woman began attending his church who grew up in a church that taught that God accepts us only if we are good enough. She said that the new message of the true gospel was scary. When asked why, she responded: 
 "If I was saved by my good works, then there would be a limit to what God could ask of me or put me through. I would be like a taxpayer with 'rights'—I would have done my duty and now I would deserve a certain quality of life. But if I am a sinner saved by sheer grace—then there's nothing he cannot ask of me." 
 Yes, works are necessary for salvation; but not our works—rather the work of Christ! While our works are a test of our spiritual hearing, they are the result of our salvation not a cause of it. We will spend the rest of this section attempting to demonstrate this. 
 "The passage that convinced me that we in the Church of Christ were thinking wrongly towards the New Testament was the Parable of the Pharisee and the Tax Collector (Luke 18:9-14). It was the tax collector who was justified rather the Pharisee (who was doing everything perfectly)!" ----Monty 
 1. What is meant by obedience within the CC seems to be different in the CC than in other parts of Christianity. How about reading this essay by Cecil Hook: (chapter 25, What God Requires) and then tell others as specifically as you can exactly what we must do to be saved? (We do not think you can possibly comply with this request.) 
 2. Has obedience been so stressed so that the Church of Christ has crossed the line into legalism and fallen into the trap of the Pharisees? Does the Parable of the Pharisee and the Tax Collector (Lk 18:9-14) apply as Garrett suggests (chapter 34, Weightier Matters)? The word legalism is derived from the word law. Since you believe that the Mosaic Law has been replaced by a new law code (the Law of Christ), doesn't that make you legalists by definition? 
 3. Jesus said, "If you love me, keep my commandments (John 14:15)." What is the context of this command? Isn't it love? Have you subtly abstracted the law of God from its original context? Is your motivation for keeping Christ's commandments the law for its own sake and the supposed results that you get from law-keeping? Or is your motivation a deep and abiding love for Jesus! Has your insistence on carefully and mechanically keeping the law robbed the essence of the New Testament of its love, joy, and life? 
 4. Jesus warned the scribes and Pharisees: Woe to you! For you tithe mint and dill and cummin, and have neglected the weightier provisions of the law—justice and mercy (Matthew 23:23). If works are so important, why not emphasize the ones that Jesus emphasized—namely justice and mercy, as well as evangelism (the Great Commandment and the Great Commission)? If you will “know them by their fruit,  why not be known by these things rather than the things the CC is known for such as like a cappella singing, church attendance, separatism, water gospel, etc.? What message do you seek to send to non-Christians? Doesn't Jesus want us to be known as those who have a radical motivation to mercy and love? 
 5. Have you added legislation to God's law and treated it as if it were from God? If so, this is a perilous danger! Have you added regulations that seek to bind the conscience? Have you added prohibitions against card playing, lipstick, dancing, wine, etc. as external tests? Where are such prohibitions in the Bible? Have you moved subtly from Godly morality into moralism? If so, as theologian R. C. Sproul explains, THIS IS A DEADLY VIOLATION OF THE GOSPEL. (Regarding wine in particular, see How Should a Christian Think about Alcohol?). 
 6. The Church of Christ's view on justification seems confused and contradictory to us. It always seems to end up with obedience as the way one is justified. When we asked a dear CC friend—who is an elder in a Church of Christ—how he knows that he is saved, he responded, "Because I have been pleasing to God." Can one really be pleasing to God? Is there anyone who is righteous: Mk 10:18, Rom 3:10-11, 1 Jn 1:8-10? Isn't our justification imputed by the righteousness of Christ rather than from ourselves? As put by C. K. Moser, "If man pleads his own works, he ignores the blood of Christ. Whoever does that will most certainly be ignored by God. No insult could be greater to God than to ignore the gift of 'His only begotten Son.' Hence Paul wrote again and again, "Not of works.' See Eph 2:8-9; Tit 3:5; Rom 4." See Moser. 
 7. After reading this, what do you now think about the concept of imputed righteousness? 
 8. We cannot help but wonder whether the CC fails to appreciate the depth of our sin. The Bible says that "The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked (Jer 17:9). It also says that "For whoever keeps the whole law and yet stumbles at just one point is guilty of breaking all of it (Jas 2:10, Mat 5:48). So, if you believe the Bible, your heart is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked. And assuming that you acknowledge at least some sin, you are guilty of breaking the whole law. Right? Thus, if you are guilty of breaking the whole law, are you really pleasing to God? 
 9. In fact, since each one of us is guilty of breaking the whole law, aren't we therefore guilty under the law and deserving of hell no matter how hard we try to keep the law? How can one possibly say that he is pleasing to God?! What seems most ironic is that in spite of its insistence on New Testament commands, the CC seems to have missed the New Testament purpose of the law—which is to show us our own sin Rom 3:20. If you have, in fact, missed the deeper penetrating spirit of the law rather than the external letter of the law, isn't it fair to say that God is not pleased?! 
 10. There are other examples of how CC theology seems to us to contradict itself. Here is what one CC teacher says: "The church of Christ does not teach salvation by works. We teach salvation by the grace of God, which is given to those whom God says will receive it: specifically, those who humbly submit to his will." When we asked, doesn't the Bible make it clear that it is one's inward character that is important (Titus 1:15), this same person responded: "Yes, and the inward character will result in humble obedience, which God requires in order for one to be saved." 
 11. We reviewed an audio tape of a lesson from the same Church of Christ gentleman. In explaining Ephesians 2:8-9 he said that “Well, this passage must mean that there are some works that do not save,  implying that there are some works that do. But in other contexts this man said, “This of course does not mean that works can earn salvation.  Isn't there a contradiction in these two apparently different statements? What then is a straight forward answer to how one is saved? 
 12. If a Christian can sin so as to lose one's salvation, just what sin or sins will place him in such danger? Is it possible to know at what point one has committed such a sin and become lost again? Please be specific and give clear Bible references. 
 13. To reiterate, the CC view on justification is contradictory. The first law of logic—The Law of Non-Contradiction—says that two distinctly different or opposite things cannot both be true at the same time and in the same sense. So, how is it reconcilable to say that we are saved by a free gift (Romans 5:15-17; 6:23) from God (grace) and at the same time imply that the gift is not free—that we are saved by our works after all? This method of interpretation makes the Bible contradict itself at every turn. Grace does not mean grace; a free gift is not free. Man is not hopelessly sinful; but then again he is. Christ is necessary; but then he isn't. The law does not save; but yes it does (and only a Church of Christ preacher can interpret all the details of which works save and which ones don't). This hermeneutic leaves the Bible in hopeless shambles. Is not this exactly what Paul is arguing in Romans 11:6 and Galatians 2:9? 
 14. Let us ask this question of biblical logic: Is grace necessary for salvation? If you say yes, then does it not follow that NOTHING one can do will be sufficient to save us? Thus, no matter how hard you labor to earn God's favor, there is still something missing, namely God's grace? If you say no, how do you deal with the over 100 passages in the New Testament that insists that we are saved by grace? 
 A young Church of Christ preacher emailed us that "We do not need the righteousness of Christ to be saved." This statement should horrify any Christian. How dare you minimize the finished work of of our Lord?! 
 We may be very wrong, as we often are. But those of us who look at the CC from the outside see such statements regarding justification as inherently contradictory and legalistic. It seems to us that the hermeneutic error that the CC makes is to make biblical statements about justification additive rather than reconciled. So, instead of making conflicting statements about, on the one hand, how we are saved by grace and elsewhere saying that we must be obedient to be saved—a contradictory construction—a better and non-contradictory construction would be to say that we are saved by grace through a type of faith which leads one to conform his life to the will of God. Does the Bible contradict itself? If so, it cannot be the Word of God. The distinction here may be subtle, but crucial. 
 The Galatian Heresy 
 "I went to a church of Christ congregation for awhile, but was surprised at what I found there. A friend sent me to your website and I was so enlightened about all of their doctrine. Thank you! One’s church or its doctrine will not save you---only Jesus can. It scares me. They proudly state that 'where the Bible is silent they are silent' and 'where it speaks they speak.' They are only fooling themselves. I have never seen people twist Scripture so much, or take what they want and omit the rest. I have heard them give long-winded, circled-around explanations of Scripture. My heart breaks for them. I truly believe in my heart that church is a cult." ----Jessica 
 J. Gresham Machen explained that, "Paul as well as the Judaizers believed that the keeping of the law of God, in its deepest import, is inseparably connected with faith. The difference concerned only the logical...order of three steps. Paul said that a man (1) first believes on Christ, (2) then is justified before God, (3) then immediately proceeds to keep God's law. The Judaizers said that a man (1) believes on Christ and (2) keeps the law of God the best he can, and then (3) is justified." So, correctly understood, sanctification follows justification as growth follows birth. (From Christian Reconstruction by Gary North and Gary DeMar.) 
 Here is where we think the Church of Christ misinterprets the Bible on a very important point. As phrased by North/DeMar, "A Judaizer is someone who believes that salvation is by grace through faith plus keeping the law....But no one can be saved by keeping the law. This is the Bible's point when Romans 6:14 says that the Christian is not under the law. This is far different from saying that the Christian is not obligated to obey the law as a standard of righteousness. Prior to regeneration, a person is unable to keep the law and is condemned for his 'lawlessness.' After a person comes to Christ the curse of the law is lifted." So it seems that the Church of Christ makes the same mistake as the Judaizers! 
 North/DeMar continue: "This question needs to be answered in a no/yes fashion. No! Christians are not sanctified by the law if one means that the law is added to faith to save someone (the Judaizing heresy). 'I do not nullify the grace of God; for if righteousness comes through the Law, then Christ died needlessly' (Galatians 2:21). If there is anything that man can do to merit or retain his salvation, then there is room for boasting. The Bible says that rebellious sinners do not even add faith; it too is a 'gift of God' (Ephesians 2:8)....'We maintain that a man is justified by faith apart from works of the Law' (Romans 3:21-28)." 
 1. CC members have told us that they choose to “emphasize obedience  in faith and practice. Why would one choose to emphasize anything? Do some passages of Scripture have more authority than others? Is the message of the Bible slanted by arbitrarily emphasizing obedience over grace, when there are over 100 passages in the New Testament that emphasize grace or faith or election as the means to salvation? (If you would like to see a comprehensive list, you may email us at mail@faithfacts.org). 
 2. Are we obedient in order to be saved or because we are saved? Doesn’t the Bible teach that people are obedient because God has already saved them (2 Cor 9:8, James 2:26, 1 Jn 2:29, 1 Jn 3:9, 1 Jn 4:7, 1 Jn 5:18)? 
 3. Did God choose us before the foundation of the world that we should be holy and blameless? Or did He choose us because were are first holy and blameless? Further, did God choose us, or did we choose God? 
 4. Perhaps a more poignant question is—Are you now free (Gal 5:1)? Or do feel like you are in bondage? Is your burden easy or light (chapter 25, What God Requires)? What does God really require? While liberals think the Christian faith is a country club, does CC doctrine make it seem like a prison? 
 5. Is the message of the New Testament simply that one legal system replaced another? Please see these links from those within your own tradition and offer your comment on them: chapter 3, Law of Christ, and chapter 22, Butting the Brethren. Are these men possibly correct that legalism is indeed the "fatal error" of CC theology? 
 6. The CC seems to make a distinction between the "law of God" and the "law of Christ," as if there were two law systems operating in the Bible. But isn't it correct that the Bible teaches that "the law of the Lord is perfect, restoring the soul" (Psalm 19:7)? And isn't the law of Christ described as perfect (James 1:25)? What law is then perfect—both the "law of God" and the "law of Christ," because they are one and the same! 
 7. What source does Jesus quote when he declares, "You shall love your neighbor as yourself"? Isn't it Leviticus 19:18? Aren't all Ten Commandments repeated or alluded to in the New Testament? What is the context of the law of Christ in Galatians 6? Isn't it bearing others' burdens with the glory only in the cross of Christ? 
 Please bear with us on some further thoughts on the Law of Christ. As Cecil Hook points out (chapter 7 beginning on page 20, Repentance Before Faith), an incorrect interpretation of this turns Jesus into a diabolical creature if we think of him giving us a law and then saving us from our transgressions of that law. It would be like someone pushing you down into a well, then throwing you a rope. Besides making Jesus into a nasty character, this idea is not biblical. John 3:17 says that "God sent his son into the world, not to condemn the world, but that the world might be saved by him." So, whatever Paul means by the law of Christ, it is not meant to be something that condemns us! It must therefore mean that the law of Christ is a phrase that merely emphasizes or gives certainty to what Paul preaches continuously in the New Testament—that we are saved by faith in Jesus. This fact (belief in Jesus for salvation), then, is so certain that it becomes a law, like a law of logic, or a law of physics—something given us by God rather than a set of commands to be obeyed. 
 8. We have heard Church of Christ people say that when Paul speaks of not being saved by "law" he is only saying he is not saved by the "Law of Moses." But please look at Ephesians 2:8-9 and Titus 3:5 again. Here Paul does not use the term law or law of Moses. He uses the term "works." And please consider Romans 13:10 in Young's Literal Translation: "Love therefore is the fulness of law." Note that in the Greek there is no "the" in front of "law," making law a general term and not just a reference to Old Testament law. Isn't Paul making a general case that we are not saved by works of any kind? 
 9. Note Galatians 3:21, again in Young's Literal Translation. Doesn't Paul make it clear that no law can give life? And Galatians 3:25: doesn't Paul further clarify that we are not under any law ("guardian")? 
 10. Do you think that only those laws that are repeated in the New Testament from the Old Testament are valid? Where is such principle of interpretation found in the Bible? We think that the better method of interpretation is that there are some laws that are cancelled or their importance neutralized in the New Testament (specifically the Jewish ceremonial and civil laws); the rest remain in effect (the moral laws). 
 11. Is there any new law in the New Testament, or only new forgiveness and the fulfillment of the shadows of this forgiveness found in the Old Testament? (Here are all the scriptures in the New Testament about a “new covenant  or “new law : Mt 26:28, Lk 22:20, 1 Cor 11:25, 2 Cor 3:6, Heb 8:8-13, Heb 9:15, Heb 12:24, Gal 6:2, James 2:8-13. Do you notice a theme?) 
 12. Cecil Hook in the preceding reference link also suggests that the CC formula HEAR/BELIEVE/REPENT/CONFESS/BE BAPTIZED may be flawed, at least in the order given. Hook points out that the 3 times in Scripture that belief and repentance are coupled together in the Bible, repentance actually precedes belief! How can that be? Read his explanation. Clue: It has to do with the New Testament view of the purpose of the law. 
 13. This brings up another point. In the New Testament, there is a difference between commands to non-believers and to believers. Non-believers are told to repent and believe (for example Acts 20:20-21). We argue that all other commands in the Bible, including baptism (!), are to people who are already Christians. 
 14. What specific work is required for salvation (John 6:27-29)? Faith, right? 
 15. Are we reconciled to God by what we do or by what God did to present us holy in his sight (Col 1:21-22)? 
 16. How does the CC respond to those who may accuse them of following the letter-of-the-law and not the spirit-of-the-law? For example, the Bible says we should care for widows and orphans (the letter of the law), and were astounded to hear a CC person tell us that charity should thus be limited to these groups. But Jesus gives the example of caring for the outcast and others who need help (example, the Good Samaritan) and commands us to be merciful (Mat 5:7). Is the CC attitude legalistic in this regard too, adding insult to injury to the Christian faith? 
 17. The CC has been known to define legalism as either (a) “putting human tradition above God’s commandments,  or (b) “taking one commandment out of context and twist it to make it contradict another.  Haven't we already shown that Church of Christ theology in fact is guilty of both definitions? 
 18. Is not faith very much alive before good works are performed, and not because of good works? Christians in the historic orthodox faith thus believe that we are saved by grace through faith and strongly agree that a faith without works is dead; that is, a true saving faith will be accompanied by works. Christians also believe that faith before it has a chance to work is a saving faith—for example, the thief on the cross. The CC would have others believe that faith is dead until one rises out of the water. Thus, someone on his way to be baptized could not be one whose faith is working by love. Isn’t this view therefore legalistic and contrary to Scripture? 
 Christians throughout the ages have pointed out that Christianity is uniquely different from all other religions and cults because salvation is through faith and not through works. Can you see that the view of salvation through works puts the CC in close company with false religions and cults? While we are not saying the Church of Christ is a cult, we cannot help pointing out the similarities between the Church of Christ and Jehovah's Witnesses or Mormons: 
 They were founded at about the same time (early 1800's) in reaction to Reformed theology. 
 The refusal to read "apostate" literature. (If the Church of Christ reader has refused to read the links we have provided in this article, our point is proven.) 
 God's grace through Christ's finished work on the cross only makes up the small portion left out by my man's own meritorious works toward salvation. (See Christian Grace vs. Mormon Grace. See also Mormon document Grace vs. Works. Note how craftily this Mormon document quotes the Bible as well as Christian thinkers.) 
 Their group restored the true faith. 
 Their group is the only one saved. 
 19. Isn’t salvation not of him who willeth, nor him that runneth, but of God that calleth (Romans 9:11) and of God that showeth mercy (Romans 9:16) without regard to human will or exertion? Don't we become sons of God by the power of God and not by the will of man (John 1:12-13)? Does anyone really seek after God on his own (Romans 3:9-28)? Don't these verses clarify that it is the work of God, not of man, that saves us? 
 20. Are we dead in our sins, or just merely sick (Ephesians 2:5)? Can a dead man respond? Aren't we therefore made alive by the work of Christ alone, just as Larazus was raised from the dead? 
 21. Just as our physical birth is not something we earn nor have any control over, isn't our spiritual birth likewise something we do not earn nor have any control over (1 Peter 1:3-5)? 
 22. Is CC theology similar to that of Pelagius, who who in the 4th century taught that man by his own powers, without the imputation of the Holy Spirit, can turn himself to God, believe the Gospel, be obedient from the heart to God’s Law—and thus merit forgiveness of sins and eternal life? Wasn’t this theology declared a heresy even by the Catholic Church—which places a high importance on obedience—because it is contrary to Holy Scripture, being the same works righteousness theology as the Galatian heresy and the Pharasaic heresy? 
 23. Here is a single question that may quickly determine whether the CC is in fact legalistic: If it would bring more people to your church to hear the gospel, would you allow instrumental music? 
 24. We suggest reading an article by John Marks Hicks of David Lipscomb University: Legalism. Then, if you are a CC member, would you consider taking this Legalism Questionnaire? 
 The Relationship of Faith and Works in Justification 
 The Church of Christ is under the impression that evangelicals have no part for works in the salvation formula. This is incorrect. The evangelical understanding is that grace = salvation + works. Though the Church of Christ does not use such formulas, their interpretation is either grace + works = salvation (semi-Pelagian), or works = salvation + grace (full-Palagian). Note: The = sign in these formulas means "leads to" or "results in." 
 We have attempted above to show above that the Church of Christ hermeneutic of of legalistic patternism is flawed. So how should the Bible be interpreted? Because this is so crucial, we repeat. First and foremost the Bible must be interpreted in such a way as not to be contradictory. If the Bible is contradictory, it cannot be God's word. Let us examine a statement made to us by a Church of Christ preacher regarding justification (how we are saved): 
 "I completely teach, believe, and agree with this idea: No person who has ever lived, is living, or will live, can in and of himself do something by which he earns, merits, deserves, or is given salvation. Every person, however, who hears and does what God has said to do in the way that God has said to do it will be saved by the grace of God through the blood of Christ." 
 1. Is it not clear that this statement—which is typical of how CC folks state justification—is contradictory? If grace is a free gift (Rom 5:15, 16, 18; Rom 6:23), if it is unmerited favor—then God does not require ANY work in order to be saved. As Paul says in Rom 11:6, "But if it is by grace, it is no longer on the basis of works; otherwise grace would no longer be grace." 
 2. St. Paul clarifies what the Church of Christ is risking in its hermeneutic. He states, "I do not nullify the grace of God, for if righteousness were through the law, then Christ died for no purpose (Gal 2:20)." This is serious. By its legalistic patternism hermeneutic, the Church of Christ is nullifying the grace of God! It is giving too much credit for sinful man and too little credit to God and Christ's finished work on the cross. As put by C. K. Moser, "If man must still work for salvation we have in Christ an atonement that does not atone!" 
 3. We fully understand how difficult the concept—that our salvation is completely by Christ's work and none of our own—is. This is incomprehensible for our Church of Christ brothers and so too for Muslims, Jehovah's Witnesses, Mormons, Jews, and every other religion. Yet the Bible insists over and over again that we are saved by faith and specifically not by our works (Romans chapters 1-9, Galatians chapters 1-3, Ephesians chapter 2, Titus chapter 3, etc). In fact, we count over 100 instances in the New Testament when it is stated that we are saved by grace rather than works. Yet the Bible commands us to obey! So how do we reconcile faith and works? 
 4. We have asked the CC why they keep coming back to James 2 in an attempt to show that salvation is through works, and the answer has been, because others "keep denying what it clearly teaches." This answer implies that, in spite of insisting elsewhere that we are not saved by works, that in fact the CC really believes after all that we are. Is James contradicting the rest of the Bible? Perhaps we just can't get it, but it seems clear to us that James himself is teaching that works are merely evidence of a true saving faith—that is, explanatory of the kind of faith that saves us? 
 5. In James 2:14 in the Greek there is a modifying adjective in front of “faith  which is left out in the King James translation, but is translated in other versions as “the  or “that  or “such.  So James is asking here, “Can such a faith save? Or, “Can that faith save?  Notice also that James does not deny that faith justifies; he simply says, “and not by faith only.  So James acknowledges that it is indeed faith that justifies. Most theologians down through the ages have insisted that the way to reconcile the biblical message of faith and works is to explain that works describe a true saving faith but do not save unto themselves? 
 6. James gives us the clues we need. First of all, James makes it clear how futile it is to think that we can be saved by our works. He insists that even one single sin on our part is equivalent to breaking the entire law (James 2:10)! Then in verse 14 he asks an explanatory question whether a dead faith can save us? (Can that faith or such a faith save us?) Of course he means, no it cannot. Then in verse 18 he says that a living, saving faith is shown by our works. So James is not saying that we are saved by works, rather our obedience is evidence of a legitimate faith. 
 So, there is, then, a simple way to reconcile faith and works in a way that is faithful to Scripture without making Scripture contradict itself. We are saved by a living faith—that is, one which expresses itself in obedience. Note that this is very different from saying that we are saved by faith plus works or any such construction. We are saved by grace through faith, not of works can we boast. 
 7. C. K. Moser gives several biblical examples of how it is faith that saves, regardless of whether or not that faith is expressed in some sort of action. He cites the stories of Jesus healing the blind in John 9 and Matthew 9. In one case, the blind man did something—washed in the pool of Siloam. In the other case, nothing was done other than what Jesus did. Moser asks, "Were these blind men cured upon different principles? In both cases the blind received sight upon the principle of faith in Christ. In one case faith expressed by overt acts, in the other case it was not. After all it is faith that the Lord wants....Faith expressed remains faith." Comment? 
 8. What about repentance—isn't that a work? Please see this link: Repentance. What is the relationship between repentance and salvation? What was Peter calling his hearers to do relative to repentance in Acts 2:38? Was this an action or a change of mind? Moser continues, "But salvation is by faith. Repentance, then, must in some way relate to faith. And it must relate to faith in such a way as not to oppose it." We argue that repentance is merely the flip side of faith. If you turn to Jesus you will by definition turn from your life of sin and selfishness. You will automatically repudiate your fleshly nature. This is the deep meaning of repentance. So, repentance is technically not a work per se. It is part of surrendering to Jesus that occurs at the point of a living faith. After we are saved by faith, we begin to show outward confirming acts such as confession and good works because of our gratitude for what God has done for us. Confession is faith expressed in words (Romans 10:9). Again, it is the faith that saves, not any expression of it. Comment? 
 9. What about baptism? Isn't it a work? Just as repentance is technically not a "work" of man, baptism is technically, according to Titus 3:4-7, not a work of man either! Baptism is a work of God! This leads us into the next section. But before that, one last word. If we are wrong in this, our error is putting too high a view on God and his work (and too low a view on our own work). If the Church of Christ is wrong on justification, your error is putting too low a view on Jesus (and too high a view on man's work)! Comment? 
 "Being raised in the Church of Christ, I began a lifelong devotion to the Word of God. But there was an incident that began to shake my faith in the Church of Christ. When I was in college, a boy I knew was killed in a car accident on his way to being baptized. He had gone through an extensive process of learning the Christian faith at my church, had professed his deep and abiding faith in Christ, and had fulfilled every requirement to be a Christian—except being baptized. Most of my friends in the church believed that because he had not been baptized that this boy was in hell for eternity. This event started me questioning the teachings of the Church of Christ. In time, I studied my way out of this sect." ----Edward 
 2. Next, if you are a Church of Christ person with an open mind, we ask you to read Leroy Garrett's article about "one baptism"— chapter 37, One Baptism. Among many other points in this article, Garrett says, "We as immersionists must rid ourselves of the ungracious notion that those who do not baptize the way we do have rebellious and disobedient hearts. They can be mistaken without being degenerate. And they can be mistaken and still be Christians who are pleasing God, just as we can still be Christians when we are mistaken." What is the difference, according to Garrett, in the etymology of a word and the meaning of a word? 
 The purpose of this section is not necessarily to try to show that the view of the Church of Christ—baptismal regenerational of mature believers by immersion—is wrong, but rather to attempt to show that such a view should not by itself be used to as a hatchet to separate from other Christian groups. CC theologian Everett Ferguson in his book instructs against such practice (page 403): "Paul in 1 Corinthians 1:13-17 protests against any view of baptism which would make it a badge of distinction among Christians instead of a unifying act." 
 3. Ferguson also warns (page 195): "Baptism provides an objective assurance of having received God's promised salvation in Christ. That may lead to the subtle temptation to trust in baptism for salvation instead of trusting in God, his act in Christ, and his word of promise." As it seems that many within the CC have yielded to this temptation, it is asked, is your faith in Christ or in baptism (chapter 13, Sectarian Baptism)? What is the difference, according to Hook, in baptism for remission of sins and baptism to receive the Holy Spirit? 
 4. First, just a point of logic. Physical life, we're sure you will agree, begins at conception rather than at birth. Similarly, we argue along with Cecil Hook that spiritual life begins with faith and not at baptism. In the rest of this section we will attempt to prove this biblically. Comment? 
 5. Moser argues about baptism similarly as he does about repentance: "If baptism is a condition of salvation which is given on the condition of faith in Christ, it too must be related to faith, and so related that its meaning will not oppose the meaning of faith. Now, as confession is faith expressed by words, baptism is faith expressed by deed....This view of baptism sanctioned by scripture lifts baptism from a meaningless act of legalism to the high plane of salvation by faith in Christ." What do you think? 
 6. Regarding Acts 10:44-48, were Cornelius and the other Gentiles (who had heard the gospel, had received the empowering Baptism in the Holy Spirit, and had spoken in tongues and praised God) children of the devil before they were baptized? Or were they children of God filled with the Holy Spirit and later got baptized? Doesn't the fact that they spoke in tongues prior to baptism prove that they were children of God and thus saved before they were baptized? Doesn't Peter in Acts 10:43 make it clear that it was the faith that produced remission of sins, and that water baptism came later as a symbol of their new life in Christ? 
 7. Doesn't Peter make it clear in Acts 10:48 that this experience was the same way the apostles received the Holy Spirit at Pentecost? Is there any record in the Bible that the apostles received water baptism? 
 8. Doesn't 1 Corinthians 12:13 show that baptism by the Holy Spirit is what places us in the body of Christ? 
 9. Your motto is, "Where the Bible speaks we speak; where the Bible is silent we are silent." But don't you break that rule all the time? For example, you say, "He that is baptized not shall be damned." But that phrase does not appear in the Bible, does it? What does appear in the Bible is, "He that believeth not shall be damned." So haven't you twisted Scripture? 
 10, What do you think about Carl Ketcherside's charge (please read chapter 9, Christians in Babylon) that,"To demand that one of God's children be forced to submit to re-baptism at the hands of one of 'our preachers' in order to be in 'our fellowship' is sectarianism pure and simple...Such Church-of-Christ-isms like all other 'isms' are an insult to the persons and dignity of the Holy Spirit by whom we 'are all baptized into one body.'" 
 11. Is Jesus Christ the head of the church of Christ? Since the head of the Church received ONLY John's baptism, is not John's baptism Christian baptism? What kind of baptism did the apostles receive? Were they saved or lost? What kind of baptism did the disciples, who who were baptized by the apostles on the authority of Christ during his personal ministry, receive (John 4:1-2)? Were they saved or lost? Was this before Pentecost? 
 12. In Mark 1:1-4, John's baptism was for "remission of sins." Were those who received John's baptism saved? If so, why were they re-baptized in Acts 19:1-5? If not, what does that say about your insistence on baptism for "remission of sins"? 
 13. Other things are listed in the Bible besides baptism for remission of sins—belief, confession, repentance. Why emphasize that a person must be baptized “purposely  for the remission of sins when not asking whether a person believes/confesses/repents “purposely  for remission of sins? If not done purposely for remission of sins, must a person re-believe/re-confess/re-repent? 
 "I've often used the idea of taking a gift check to the bank and endorsing it to explain baptism. The act of signing the gift check in no way earns it, or even merits it, nor does this action make it any less of a gift. Baptism is simply how we "endorse" and identify with what God has done for us in Christ Jesus. Therefore, in baptism we express our faith that His check won't bounce; that His righteousness is credited to our account; that our name is entered on His ledger." ----Church of Christ preacher in Hawaii 
 14. What do you think of Cecil Hook's comparison to baptism/beginning of spiritual life and physical birth/conception? Does baptism initiate life or was it initiated earlier—at the point of faith, or at the point of the work of the Holy Spirit, or even at the point of God's election? 
 15. What do you think of R. C. Sproul's strong conviction, based on Ephesians 2:1-10, that regeneration actually precedes faith (regeneration)? (By the way, Sproul is a man who has written over 70 books and is considered by many to be one of the top theologians of our age.) 
 16. It is recognized that the modern Church of Christ does not claim a heritage from the original Restoration Movement and will probably recoil at these next few questions. However, the modern CC undeniably traces its lineage to it, and so one would think that CC folk would have at least some respect for the views of the founders. Alexander Campbell was rebaptized as an adult upon a simple confession of his faith in Jesus as the Messiah. He never changed his views on this and was never baptized "for the remission of sins." So, what should one think of the fact that none of the 4 primary founders of the restoration movement—Thomas Campbell, Alexander Campbell, Walter Scott, nor Barton W. Stone—were ever immersed to “wash away sins?  Why did Mr. Scott and the Campbells never “obey  the “Ancient Gospel  which Mr. Scott “restored?  
 17. Since Alexander Campbell was baptized by a Baptist preacher (Elder Luce) and was thus put into the Church of Christ, why will not Baptist Baptism do the same for people today? If Elder Luce did not baptize Campbell into Christ, when and where and how did Campbell ever get into Christ, since he died with Baptist Baptism and never repudiated it? If Campbell was baptized into Christ by Luce's act, then was not the Church of Christ in fact already here? 
 For the record, when the Campbells founded their first church, the Brush Run Church, they accepted "sprinkled" people as baptized, and the Campbells would not then rebaptize such ones. Included in the group who were baptized included a baby. 
 Also of note, Thomas Campbell immersed three people before he himself had been immersed. Alexander Campbell in fact taught that, “Baptism is an ordinance by which we formally profess Christianity….It confirms nothing…. The seal of the Holy Spirit requires no external ordinance to perfect it.  
 18. Is it true that anyone who is not baptized according to the CC formula is considered an "unsaved child of the devil?" Were the founders of the Restoration Movement then unsaved children of the devil? Could they be "fellowshipped" by their congregations today? 
 19. Indeed, there is a more fundamental question about the CC teaching that a person who is to be baptized should profess to be an unsaved child of the devil. Is this not missing the point entirely—that it is a child of God who is to be baptized—one who is saved by grace?! 
 20, "If baptism were necessary for salvation, Ephesians 2:8 and many other verses should have been translated ‘ye are saved through faith and baptism.’…Baptism is a distinct act of obedience apart from salvation. This is clarified by the order in which the words ‘believe’ and ‘baptize’ occur in the text…  Don't you agree? 
 22. Isn't it true that faith and repentance always precede baptism in the New Testament, and never follow it? 
 "Growing up, I had a few very good friends who were Baptist, Bible Church, and Community Church. The fruit I saw in their lives had a huge impact on me. Over time, I began to question several of the CC doctrines because the answers they gave seemed lacking, incomplete, or just plain wrong Biblically. The real change came when I questioned the whole essence of salvation. Of course, they teach baptismal regeneration. I read that I was justified by faith. They told me I had to have faith before I was baptized, but that it was actually baptism that saved me. Why did I need to be saved if I was already justified by faith? The more I questioned this, the more I began to understand that my obedience could never satisfy an absolutely holy, righteous God who demands absolute perfection from me. I knew baptism wasn’t going to do it! That’s when I really began to appreciate that God has granted us justification through faith. But even this didn’t set well with me. How strong did my faith need to be to be acceptable to this perfect God? That’s when it really hit home that we are saved “by grace  through faith. I left the CC in 1996 (although they tried to publicly “disfellowship  me after I left) and have been growing in grace ever since then. What a comfort it is to know that I can stand before God judged not on my own merits, but on the merits of Jesus. So that’s my story in a nutshell. Praise God!" ----Brett 
 23. Lanny Tanton is a former Church of Christ preacher that changed his mind on Acts 2:38. For his detailed analysis see Change of Mind. 
 24. Regarding the conversion of Paul in Acts 22:16, wasn't Paul actually saved on the road to Damascus rather than when he was baptized later? See this detailed analysis by Lanny Tanton: The Gospel and Water Baptism. 
 25. Did Jesus know the plan of salvation (John 14:6)? Did Christ personally, at any time or place tell a sinner to be baptized FOR or IN ORDER to the Remission of Sin? If so, where and when? Why didn’t Jesus regularly practice baptism if it is so important? 
 26. Does the word water as used in John 3:5 mean baptism? Why didn't Christ say what he meant to say? If he really meant baptism—when he said water—by the same reasoning he evidently meant baptism in the next Chapter (John 4:7-15). Read again the story of the Woman at the Well and substitute the word baptism for water everywhere it is found in the story exactly as you substitute the word baptism for water in John 3:5, and see what a story you make. False doctrines always lead to muddy water. WHERE THE BIBLE SPEAKS, WE SPEAK. 
 27. Why did Paul say in 1 Cor 1:17 that he did not come to baptize? 
 28. If people fall away, is it possible to tell if they were really saved or not (Heb 6:4)? What if the person only appeared to fall away when in fact he was never truly a believer in the first place—but then later does in fact come to a saving faith? If he had been baptized previously, should he now be re-baptized? How does one know if they should be re-baptized? 
 29. Why use 1 Cor 6:11 (“ye are washed ) to support the CC view of baptismal salvation? Is there anything here that says washing means baptism? Isn’t washing just another word for cleansing? Don’t Rev 1:5 and Rev 7:14 make it clear that the washing is from Christ’s blood rather than water baptism? 
 30. Is it correct that the healing of Naaman in the Jordan River (2 Kgs 5) is used to support this water gospel doctrine? If so, isn’t this distorting the Bible in an attempt to prove a wrong doctrine? (Healing of leprosy is not evidence of salvation, is it? And Naaman did not even believe in God when he was healed, right?) 
 31. Is it even theoretically possible for someone to have met all the biblical requirements to be saved—but died en route to being baptized—and still go to heaven? If the answer is yes, doesn’t that show that the emphasis on baptism might be misplaced? If the answer is, “I cannot put myself on the judgment throne of God and pronounce him lost any more than you can put yourself on the judgment throne of God and pronounce him saved. —isn’t this an admission that indeed baptism is not a necessary requirement to be saved (in every situation)? Thus, if it is not a necessary requirement to be saved in every situation, it is not a requirement at all?! 
 "There are those who have taught that baptism is necessary for salvation, as if baptism adds to the finished work of Christ. We have felt that baptism is necessary for obedience, but that baptism doesn't add to what Christ does for us in the cross, and doesn't add to what a person receives by faith....I came to a better understanding of grace that I didn't have before....There was some latent legalism in me—and there probably still is. So we started studying the Gospel, and I personally found out that I was kind of overlaying the Gospel with regulations and rules. And so I repented of that, and we began teaching the Gospel." ----Max Lucado, former Church of Christ preacher 
 Immersion 
 1. Garrett says (chapter 38, Fellowship the Unimmersed), "An interesting book on the history of the dispute about baptism, entitled The Water That Divides, shows that the issue is not as simple as we have supposed. He notes that while there is universal agreement that baptism was often by immersion in the New Testament, it is not universally agreed that all baptisms were by immersion. And so throughout the history of the church, the author states, baptism has been administered by immersion, pouring, and sprinkling." What do you think? 
 2. Please see this definition of baptism, especially the section that says "Meaning of the Word in the New Testament." Wouldn't you agree that it has been shown conclusively that baptism does not always mean immersion in the New Testament? 
 3. Garrett also quotes Barton Stone in the same article: "Shall we make immersion the test of religion, and why is immersion emphasized more than the love of God, holiness, mercy, and self denial?" Stone argued that if God could accept Cornelius before he was immersed, those in the CC should be able to accept those who have not yet attained to your understanding. 
 4. If someone meets all other requirements of the Christian faith but is not immersed, are they saved? 
 5. Doesn’t the Bible use the word baptism in ways other than immersion? For example, in 1 Cor 10:1-4 the Israelites were baptized by only getting their feet wet, while it was the Egyptians who got immersed. In Mark 7:4 baptism is described as washing of vessels, which is not necessarily immersion but could be pouring or scrubbing. Hebrews 9:10 speaks of “various ceremonial washings.  The word here is baptismos. The ceremonial washing, or baptisms, that follow are rites of purification in the Old Testament (cf. Heb 9:13-31). In all of these ceremonial washings, the method of application was sprinkling. 
 6. In fact, all Old Testament purifications or washings were by sprinkling (Num 8:7, 19:19, Lev 14:7, etc). Doesn't it stand to reason that New Testament Jewish Christians would have appreciated that method of baptism? 
 7. It just seems to many this is another example of the CC taking a legalistic stance to separate from other Christians. Doctrine allows (requires) interpretation. It is not appropriate to take everything in the Bible in a wooden literal sense. The CC would not say that one must literally eat Jesus' body to be saved —Jn 6:50-58 (as some Catholics believe). In the same way, when the Bible says we are baptized unto remission of sins, it is not a necessary inference that in order to be saved, we must perform a ritual baptism exactly as the Church of Christ does it!? 
 8. Finally, this observation about baptism. A faithful CC man responded to the above questions in great detail, arguing that these opposing views are wrong. But he also said, "Baptism does not procure [i.e. purchase] salvation. It is entirely the gift of God." This seems to contradict his other arguments for the necessity of water baptism for salvation. But anyway, his statement seems to be one we can all agree on! So, we ask, is baptism really so much of an issue over which you must draw the line of fellowship with the rest of us? 
 We have a friend who was formerly a CC preacher. He told us that when he used to baptize people, he would be sure that every inch of the person's body was underwater. If a knee was exposed, he would push it under, to be sure they were saved. 
 "Certain new theologians dispute original sin, which is the only part of Christian theology which can really be proved." ----G. K. Chesterton, Orthodoxy, p. 15. 
 1. The CC flatly and emphatically denies the historic biblical doctrine of Original Sin (as do, interestingly, every cult and all non-biblical world religions). Doesn't the Bible teach that man is born with a fleshly (sinful) nature that is in some way inherited from Adam (Rom 5:12-Rom 6:23)? Historic Christian theology has been insistent on this doctrine and it makes Christianity unique among world religions. It is this understanding that makes the work of Christ so important and makes Christianity so different from every other religion. What do you think? 
 2. Ferguson, in attempting to explain the CC view makes a distinction between the "human condition" of sin and the "human nature" of sin (pages 137-148). This seems to be a distinction without a difference, unless the CC is merely using this topic to try to separate from other Christians. Yet, Ferguson acknowledges the universality of sin as a consequence of the Fall. Agree? 
 3. By denying original sin, does the CC make Christianity similar to all other religions who teach that man is born good? Doesn’t this view minimize the work of Christ—his perfect life, his death and resurrection to atone for our sins? Wasn’t the intensity of Christ’s suffering on the cross necessary as payment for the intensity of man’s sin? 
 4. Even the apostle Paul could not always carry out what he knew to be right (Rom 7:15-24). Here we have St. Paul, the most diligent apostle in all of history crying out near the end of his glorious ministry "Wretched man that I am." Note that he is not saying this in the past tense but in the present tense! Why didn't Paul reform (chapter 14, Paul)? 
 5. For the record, here are important passages about our sin: Gen 6:5, 8:21, 1 Kgs 8:46, Job 14:1-4, 25:2-6, Ps 14, Ps 51:3-5, 53:1-3, 58:3-5, Prov 14:12, Ecc 7:20, Isaiah 53:6, 55:8-9, 59:2, 64:6, Jer17:9, Dan 9:1-11, Mk 7:20-23, Rom 3:9-23, Rom 5:12-21, 7:13-25, 8:5-8, 14:23, Gal 5:16-21, Eph 2:1-3, Js 2:10, 1 Jn 1:8-10? Is there even one person on earth who is righteous (Ecc 7:20)? Aren’t we sinful by our very nature (Eph 2:3)? 
 6. Doesn’t the CC view of sin ignore the obvious observable sin nature of little children—their selfishness and even hurtfulness that comes quite naturally at an early age? Don’t children have to be taught to be good? In fact, don't adults as well have to be taught to be good? (These are arguments we make to non-Christians, and it seems so surprising that we have to make these same arguments to those who profess the authority of the Bible.) 
 7. We wonder whether the CC has failed to fully grasp the enormity of God’s holiness (Ex 3:5, 15:11, 19:23, 1 Chr 16:29, 2 Chr 20:21, Ps 29:2, 93:5, 96:9, Isaiah 6:1-8, 29:23, 40:25, and Revelation 15:4)? The theological question then becomes: could it be that the CC view grossly fails to appreciate the enormity of the unbridgeable gap between man’s sinfulness and God’s holiness? 
 8. Are we dead in our sins, or merely sick (John 5:25; Romans 6:11)? Can a dead man respond? Isn't this like the difference between having cancer and a cold? So, isn't this why various passages point out that the gospel is the work and power of God and not the work of man in obedience (Rom 1:16; 1 Cor 1:18; 1 Cor 15:1-11, etc)? 
 "Christians down through the ages have come to realize how truly weak and sinful they are—beginning with St. Paul (Romans 7:18-20), and Isaiah before him (Isaiah 6:1-8). Sin, properly understood, creates such a chasm between man and God that the Bible says that all creation groans (Rom 8:22). Only when I really-and-truly realized this did I understand that I had been putting the emphasis in the wrong place. It is not at ALL about my ability to be obedient, but rather the incredible mercy God has shown us Romans 3:9-28)! Since then, I started preaching Christ rather than any so-called plan of salvation. I now preach the Gospel of the Glory of Christ, and not oursleves or any such legalism (2 Cor 4:4-6)!" ----Church of Christ evangelist 
 1. Hughes in his book says that many young people within the church of Christ think their traditional view of the Holy Spirit is "Lashing the Spirit of God to an objective book of paper and ink—or, indeed, circumscribing the Spirit with any kind of rational constraints—ultimately impoverished the soul and drained life of its meaning." Does this charge concern you? 
 2. Have you arbitrarily put the Holy Spirit in a box by ignoring the work the work that He does: Holy Spirit? 
 3. Does the Holy Spirit indwell a person (John 14:17; Romans 8:9-11; 1 Corinthians 3:16; 1 Corinthians 6:19; Galatians 4:6; Ephesians 3:16-19; 2 Timothy 1:14; 1 John 4:13-17)? 
 4. Isn't the Holy Spirit's activity on a person so important that he cannot even receive spiritual reality without the Holy Spirit (1 Corinthians 2:14; 1 Corinthians 12:3)? Isn't natural man so at enmity with God that without the Spirit he cannot do God's will (Romans 8:6-7)? 
 SOME IMPORTANT PASSAGES TO CONSIDER. When we asked former Church of Christ preacher Jerrel Kratt what passages he considers most important in helping people escape from legalism, he suggested these: (1.) Romans 4 and justification by faith for Abraham before he was circumcised. Paul refers to Genesis 15, where Abraham simply accepted the promise of God and hadn't acted on it yet for several years to come. (2.) Law cannot save, it can only condemn. It convicts the conscience. The spirit gives life, the new covenant is not a covenant of death (it doesn't convict sin). See 2 Corinthians 3; Romans 7:1-8:1; Galatians 3:11. Rather, the new covenant is a covenant of life! (3.) We are under grace not law (Romans 6:14). Salvation is by grace through faith, not works that no man boast (Ephesians 2:8-9). 
 Bibliography: 
 A Call to Unity: A Critical Review of Patternism and the Command-Example-Inference-Silence Hermeneutic by Barry L. Perryman, Ph.D. (This short 84 page book is the first book we recommend for members of the Church of Christ to read. It's also a very good book for friends to give to members of the Church of Christ to begin a discussion. It's available at bperryman1296@charter.net.) 
 Reviving the Ancient Faith; The Story of Churches of Christ in America by Richard T. Hughes (This is the authoritative history of the Restoration Movement. On online version can be viewed at Ancient Faith.) 
 Free in Christ by Cecil Hook—an astoundingly honest book by a brave man willing to change his views and buck the system. An online version is available at Freedom's Ring) 
 Our Heritage of Unity and Fellowship by W. Carl Ketcherside & Leroy Garrett—a book filled with revelations about the history and doctrine of the Churches of Christ that are certain to enlighten Christians everywhere (online version available at Freedom's Ring) 
 The Church of Christ; A Biblical Ecclesiology for Today by Everett Ferguson 
 columns by Al Maxey, rated as the most popular Church of Christ blog site out of over 2 dozen sites (online at Maxey) 
 various writings of John Marks Hicks (available online at Ministries and Hicks) 

 id="file23242838" filename="college-student-guide-to-writing-about-theology-and-religion" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://writersperhour.com/blog/college-student-guide-to-writing-about-theology-and-religion">
 Get Your Custom Paper Written 24/7 Superior Quality, Reliability and Exceptional Customer Service! 
 The College Student's Guide to Writing Theology and Religion Assignments 
 Growing up, you were always intrigued to learn more about the history and origin of different religions, how the concept of God varies and the likes, which is why you took up Religion and Theology in college, with great earnestness. 
 Yes, it is an interesting subject and you were thoroughly enjoying everything the course had to offer until one fine day, when you were asked to write a Theology and Religion essay. 
 Now, you’re just staring at a blank computer screen, wondering where and how to begin! Does that ring a bell? 
 Wipe away those tears because here’s presenting the complete guide on finishing your Theology and Religion paper and how you can do a brilliant job at it. 
 Everything You Need to Know About Writing a Theology and Religion College Paper 
 Theology and Religion studies focuses on teaching students about the various types of religions that exist in the contemporary world. 
 An interdisciplinary field, this subject encourages students to explore how people from different religions and cultures express their faith and the driving reasons behind the same. Regardless of whether you believe in a particular faith, studying Theology and Religion serves as a window to gaining insights into religious ideas and how they shaped the world as we see it today. 
 Types of Theology and Religion Writing Assignments 
 Theology and Religion studies involves extensive coursework and writing assignments which are aimed at shaping students’ perspectives on religion while considering the cultural, historical, sociological and anthropological aspects. 
 As a Theology and Religion student, here are the 4 common types of papers you will come across. 
 Research Paper 
 This paper requires students to present a thesis statement and make arguments to support it. Being one of the longer assignments, writing research papers need you to fully explore a certain topic, raise interesting questions and present logical evidence to demonstrate your understanding. You might also need to conduct quantitative and qualitative research to support your paper. 
 Comparative Essay 
 As the name suggests, comparative essays involve making comparisons while highlighting similarities and differences between two theories or concepts. You are expected to tie your comparisons to a broader theological point. 
 To know more about writing compare and contrast essays, take a look at this video 
 Critical Analysis 
 Contrary to popular perception, critical analysis does not refer to ‘criticizing’ a religion or ideology. Instead, you need to break down the text and evaluate the different aspects while gathering research material from various sources to support your claim or argument. The keyword here is - analysis. 
 Reflection Paper 
 Reflection papers urge you to reflect, look inwards and present your personal opinion surrounding a particular theological or religious concept. You get the chance to reflect on your experiences and the impact they have had in shaping your perceptions. 
 Don’t mistake this for an informal essay - a reflection paper is as ‘formal’ as the others. 
 How to Write a Theology and Religion Essay for College 
 Regardless of what type of paper it is, all Theology and Religion essays involve certain steps which when followed with sincerity and precision can set you up for success. 
 Let’s take a look at the step-by-step guide to writing a Theology and Religion essay for college. 
 Pick a Focussed Topic 
 If you have been given a specific topic, you don’t have to worry about this step. What you need to do is understand the question well. Is it asking you to compare, analyze, reflect, review - make sure you know what is expected of you in order to do justice to it. 
 Now, let’s look at a situation wherein you are asked to pick a topic of your choice or are given an open-ended topic to explore. 
 The key to a successful paper is a narrow and focussed topic or research question. You need to get into the ‘how’s and ‘why’s to generate a novel paper. It cannot be something that you have learnt about in class or one that has been done to death. 
 In order to stand out, you need to first entice the instructor with an interesting topic or take on an interesting angle that will set you apart from your classmates. 
 Here’s a video on how you can narrow down your essay topic 
 Conduct Extensive Research 
 Research is key - your paper will only be as strong as the research you do. 
 So, give yourself ample time to research and scan essential reading material such as journals, online sources, existing research studies, religious text and library books. The more you read, the more meat you will have to write this paper. 
 It is also a good idea to speak to experts in the field of theology and religion to get fresh views and insights into the topic you are exploring. 
 Considering the amount of reading you will be doing, always keep a notebook by your side to highlight and take notes on the important points that would be of use while writing the paper. This is an effective way to gather references for citations at the end of the assignment. 
 Draft an Outline 
 Hold on - don’t start writing, not just yet. 
 Before the writing process, you need to first work on a rough outline. This will ensure you don’t miss out any point and maintain a logical flow while writing. 
 So, work on an outline and map your points to the following key headings: 
 Introduction - introduce the topic and main points of the paper while giving background information and context. This paragraph needs to end with a strong, arguable thesis; 
 Body - this section consists of multiple paragraphs where you need to discuss your thesis and present your arguments and evidence obtained from research; 
 Conclusion - the concluding paragraph needs to reinstate your thesis statement and do a quick recap of your main arguments. 
 Start the Writing Process 
 Now that you have your outline ready with the important points, you can finally start writing. 
 Considering the amount of information you are grappling with, you might get overwhelmed at first - not knowing how to articulate yourself properly. 
 To avoid a panic attack in such situations, we recommend breaking down the writing process as per the sections. That way, you can approach it with a clear mind and concentrate better. 
 Here’s a tip - thesis statements are a key component so instead of wasting time on it in the beginning, start with a rough thesis statement which you can come back to and finetune once you are done with the rest of the paper. 
 Proofread 
 There are two parts to proofreading - one involves ensuring you have accurately addressed the question, included the relevant sections in a logical fashion and presented your paper as per the requirements. The second part is reading the essay to spot grammatical, spelling and sentence formation errors. 
 Another aspect to remember while proofreading is checking whether your essay is free of plagiarism. Sometimes, in spite of delivering ‘original’ work, a few silly mistakes can result in unintentional plagiarism. 
 Proofreading once is not enough - give your essay a couple of readings before turning it in. Make sure you don’t read it immediately after writing because you are likely to be tired to spot errors. So, give your brain a rest and come back to it the next morning. 
 What Makes an Excellent Theology and Religion College Paper 
 You need to submit a Theology and Religion paper that makes your instructor go. 
 Wondering how? Here are 4 essential elements that make up an excellent Theology and Religion essay. 
 Logical Evidence 
 Through your writing, you need to convince the reader about the stance you are taking by presenting substantial evidence. Now, this requires thorough research, reading and analysis. 
 From sacred scriptures and worship texts to official religious teachings - these are all considered to be logical evidence and which need to be referred to in your paper. 
 Accurate Facts 
 Misinterpretation of facts is a serious problem in academic writing. You might think “no one will notice  but when your inaccuracies are spotted, it serves to be a huge blow. 
 Hence, make sure the facts and references you include are accurate and from reliable sources. For instance, you cannot be referencing to a Wikipedia page because it is certainly not reliable as it allows people to edit information whenever they please. 
 Inaccurate references reflect your laziness and lack of knowledge which is why you should always verify your references by double-checking the information you choose to include. 
 Neutral and Inclusive Writing 
 Let’s face it - Theology and Religion is a sensitive topic which makes it all the more important to be cautious about the language you are using. Such a paper demands the use of neutral and inclusive writing. 
 What does that mean? Be respectful, unbiased, use non-sexist language and avoid using words that might be offensive. 
 So, while you are proofreading your paper, be on the lookout and ensure you are sensitive to all sentiments and stay away from cultural biases that might dampen your paper. 
 Take a look at this insightful video on why using gender-inclusive language matters 
 Clarity in Writing 
 From using correct grammar and spellings to proper presentation and formatting - all these factors contribute to writing with clarity. 
 You might have strong points and arguments but unless you don’t articulate properly, there is no way you can drive your message home and leave a positive impression in the minds of readers. 
 Hence, make sure you plan your writing, use the right terminology and structure your paper such that it is easily comprehensible. 
 Conclusion 
 Considering the intimidating and time-consuming nature of this assignment, many students end up despising the subject but you don’t have to. 
 Follow this extensive guide, take it one step at a time and immerse yourself in the assignment - that is the only way you can do a good job at it and enjoy the process. 
 If you are still worried about writing your Theology and Religion paper, Writers Per Hour would be happy to come to your rescue. 
 All you have to do is write to us with your requirements and deadline, and we will get our team of Theology and Religion paper writing experts on the job. From choosing the appropriate topic to doing research and accurately citing references - our assigned writing expert will work with you to put together an exemplary essay that is sure to help you ace this assignment. 

 id="file23242835" filename="contextual-theology-is-a-mechanism-contributing-to-sustainable-peace" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://religionanddiplomacy.org/2021/12/10/contextual-theology-is-a-mechanism-contributing-to-sustainable-peace/">
 Religion & Diplomacy A Resource of the Transatlantic Policy Network on Religion and Diplomacy 
 Contextual Theology is a Mechanism Contributing to Sustainable Peace 
 Religion and religious actors have critical roles to play in peacebuilding as we face a range of ongoing tensions and conflicts. The question is how can we ensure religion does not play a role in perpetuating these conflicts, but rather serves as a guiding mechanism to support sustainable peace? 
 There is an intrinsic link between—and a growing policy interest in—religion, peacebuilding, and violence. It is critical to identify how religion can be utilized as a key mechanism to support peace and mitigate violence. 
 Dr. Mohamed Elsanousi, executive director of the Network of Religious and Traditional Peacemakers. [photo credit: NRTP] 
 When religious peacebuilders look at how our fellow religionists can support sustainable peace, we need to think about how theology shapes our approach to conflict resolution and dialogue. One constructive method is opening up safe spaces for dialogue, which allow intra- and inter-faith communities to discuss balanced, contextual theology and faith-based interpretations related to current issues. Contextual theology takes into consideration local customs, cultures, and traditions. Safe spaces are also ideal to share resources, experiences, and concerns related to violent radicalization or other socioeconomic issues, and they can also be useful spaces for identifying skills and tools to respond more effectively to violence. 
 Interpretation of sacred texts must continue to evolve alongside changing customs, cultures, and norms. That is to say, religious leaders have the opportunity to interpret scriptures in light of the needs and concerns of contemporary society. Religious groups do not have to compromise their fundamentals when scriptures are adapted to local contexts. In fact, I see the universal values of love, compassion, respect, and service—to name a few—as lying at the core of religious traditions, regardless of how progressively a sacred text is interpreted. 
 Religious and faith-based institutions have developed statements and other resources that promote moral values, including tolerance and mutual respect, as a basis for human rights and religious freedom. For instance, the Marrakesh Declaration—issued by Muslim religious leaders, scholars, and politicians—champions “defending the rights of religious minorities in predominantly Muslim countries.  Similarly, the Catholic Church has developed bodies of teaching on human rights and religious freedom. Most notable is the Second Vatican Council’s Declaration on Religious Liberty, which teaches that religious freedom is the cornerstone of a society that promotes human dignity as a fundamental human right. 
 We have also seen religious communities adapt their theologies to welcome and accept new realities. Jewish theologians are developing contextual theology in an attempt to apply wisdom from their traditions to modern-day debates on social justice. In recent years, for example, practitioners of Reform Judaism—the largest Jewish denomination in the United States—have progressively adapted their positions on social issues. 
 These examples demonstrate that contextualization does not disregard from the fundamental values outlined in various faith traditions, but rather enhances them to best serve people in contemporary society and to support sustainable peace and social cohesion. That is the beauty of contextual theology—it allows one to keep their fundamental beliefs and values while adapting to a local context. 
 However, we know there are faith actors and faith communities that have not embraced contextual theology and rather still adhere to their traditionalist positions. Local communities must also be vigilant and refuse a theology that does not accord with their local context and culture. We have seen a mismatch between theology and local norms quite frequently, especially in missionary work. For example, Muslim missionaries have traveled to minority communities in southern Thailand, the Philippines, and northeast Nigeria to spread religious messages and teachings. However, these teachings may not fit the context of these local communities. The disregard for applying contextual theology can result in radicalization and even violence. 
 Despite the challenges within faith traditions and societies, the traditions and values encompassed in sacred texts and practices are becoming vital mechanisms to support sustainable peace. It is also important to note that international instruments do not always address the root causes of conflict. The presiding bishop of the South Sudan Pentecostal Church has argued that the importance of local communities’ customs, cultures, and traditions must be emphasized in all work to support grassroots engagement for sustainable peace. The only way that we can truly understand conflicts is through the engagement of local leaders, such as religious and traditional actors. This also includes understanding the local religious and faith-based practices and beliefs embedded in a society. 
 An effective contextual theology must also engage meaningfully with women and youth. In 2017, the Network for Religious and Traditional Peacemakers participated in a contextual leadership training in Nigeria that gave both Muslim and Christian women the tools for creating and sustaining collaborative mechanisms for building peaceful communities. Following this training, 347 wives of Christian pastors committed to build relationships with the wives of imams in the community. 
 While this was a significant engagement, it was important to recognize that the wives and religious leaders are generally part of an older demographic. We must not underestimate the importance of engagement and collaboration with religiously motivated youth. We need to stop viewing youth as the “future  and realize their present contribution. 
 We need to set a foundation of balanced contextual theology and interreligious dialogue in order to move forward with supporting localized peace processes. While engaging with faith communities is vital, it is important to ensure there is balanced collaboration, incorporating various local traditions and customs. This sort of interconnectedness will maximize the potential to support peaceful and cohesive societies. 
 This blog is based on remarks by Dr. Mohamed Elsanousi at the 2021 G20 Interfaith Forum in Bologna, Italy. Elsanousi is the executive director of the Network for Religious and Traditional Peacemakers. 
 Banner image: Mohamed Elsanousi speaks at the Berkley Center event on February 13, 2019. [Photo credit: Berkley Center for Religion, Peace, and World Affairs] 
 Get the latest from Religion & Diplomacy in your email. 
 By Dr. Mohamed Elsanousi ~ Religion and religious actors have critical roles to play in peacebuilding as we face a range of ongoing tensions […] 
 As the Henry R. Luce Foundation brings its Religion in International Affairs Initiative to a close, the foundation’s Director of Policy Initiatives Toby Alice Volkman […] 
 By Mohammed Abu-Nimer ~ This guest blog by Prof. Mohammed Abu-Nimer is adapted from his remarks at the G20 Interfaith Forum in Bologna, Italy in […] 
 By Pasquale Annicchino ~ In recent years we have seen growing interest in the relationship between religion and innovation. In particular, the deployment of AI […] 
 This guest blog by Prof. Brett Scharffs is adapted from his remarks at the G20 Interfaith Forum in Bologna, Italy on September 13, 2021. The […] 
 In her new book, Secular Power Europe and Islam: Identity and Foreign Policy, Sarah Wolff argues that Europe can be thought of as a secular power, […] 
 In this TPNRD webinar, Sarah Wolff discusses her new book, Secular Power Europe and Islam: Identity and Foreign Policy (2021) with Religion & Diplomacy editor […] 
 In Faith, Nationalism, and the Future of Liberal Democracy (2021), co-authors David Elcott, C. Colt Anderson, Tobias Cremer, and Volker Haarmann explore how religious identity […] 
 The Centre for Church-based Development (CKU) in Denmark has released a new report arguing that freedom of religion or belief (FoRB) is an important and […] 

 id="file23242518" filename="Crash-Course-in-Jewish-Blessings.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.aish.com/jl/jewish-law/blessings/Crash-Course-in-Jewish-Blessings.html">
 Crash Course in Jewish Blessings 
 “Blessings  are short statements that express gratitude for something. Why are they called “blessings  and not, say, “thankings ? And even stranger, why do they all start with the statement, “Blessed are You ? Isn’t it we who are blessed by Him? 
 Well, first things first: what does the word “bless  mean, anyway? In Hebrew, the root that means “bless  is b.r.kh, and the Sages explain that it means “to increase  or “bring down Divine abundance.  When I “bless  you, I am asking God to increase your health, wealth, happiness or whatever it may be, to shine His light on you… in essence, to give you more of Himself. So what could it possibly mean for me to “bless  God for creating the apple I’m about to eat? 
 The key to understanding this is to recognize the purpose of these blessings. It is not merely to show gratitude. The purpose of a blessing is awareness. 
 The purpose of a blessing is awareness. 
 When I hold an apple in my hand and say, “Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, who creates the fruit of the tree,  what I’m really saying is a lot more than just “thanks for making this apple.  I’m saying, “Your presence in this world has been made that much greater, has increased, through this fruit You created that I am about to enjoy.  
 I’m declaring that whatever it is I’m making the blessing for – whether it’s a food I’m enjoying, a roll of thunder I heard, or a mitzvah I’m about to perform – is increasing God’s presence in the world, through my recognition of His role in creating or commanding it. 
 This is one of the main themes of Judaism: channeling the Divine into the mundane and revealing the spiritual through the physical. Through this worldly experience, I experience God; and when I declare that recognition, I make His presence in the world that much more known. 
 Simply put: in this apple, I see God. 
 There are three main types of blessings. 
 Blessings of Enjoyment 
 These are blessings we make over something we enjoy with our senses. The most common ones are blessings over food. We recite blessings both before and after eating. There are different blessings for different categories of food: bread (“… who brings forth bread out of the ground ); grain products that are not defined as bread (“… who creates different kinds of sustenance ); wine (“… who creates the fruit of the vine ); fruit (“… who creates the fruit of the tree ); vegetables (“… who creates the fruit of the ground ); and everything else (“… from whose word all came into being ). If that sounds complicated, wait until I tell you that bananas and pineapples are halakhically “vegetables  because they are non-perennial plants… or that food can switch categories according to how it is prepared or eaten (for instance, orange juice). And don’t even get me started on what defines a grain product as bread, or why we say “the fruit of the vine  for wine, but “the fruit of the tree  for grapes! The point is that to make the correct blessing, you have to have a basic awareness of how that food came to be on your plate. And making the blessing gives you an opportunity to reflect on this process. The apple came from a tree, which grew from the ground, thanks to sunlight and water and nutrients from the soil, and it’s God who made all this happen. 
 “After blessings  are also divided by category: the long birkat hamazon (“blessing for sustenance /“Grace After Meals ) for after eating bread or a meal with bread, a shortened version called me’en shalosh for grain products that are not bread, or fruits that fall under the category of the Seven Species, wheat, barley, grapes, dates, figs, pomegranates, and olives These are the seven species that the land of Israel is especially celebrated for in the Torah (Deut 8:8). 
 The last “after blessing  is boreh nefashot. It’s short and in my view, it’s one of the most beautiful and meaningful. It goes like this: “Blessed are You… who creates numerous souls and their deficiencies; for all that You have created with which to maintain the life of every being. Blessed is He, the life of worlds.  
 Why would we be thanking God for creating a deficiency? Because the very reason we are thanking Him for giving us something to eat is that He created hunger. If we were not hungry, we would not enjoy the fulfillment of that lack. Take this idea beyond physical sustenance and you’ll have a lot to think about. 
 Enjoyment blessings are also made on smelling something pleasant. These are very specific too, ranging from pleasant scents from flowers and trees, to the scent of herbs, to the scent of fruit, to the most specific – balsam oil. This, too, is a moment to pause and reflect on where this pleasant experience comes from, and use it to channel Godliness into the world. 
 Another blessing in this category is shehechiyanu: “Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, who has granted us life, sustained us, and enabled us to reach this occasion.  This is the blessing we make over new experiences (such as wearing new clothing) or occasions that are rare enough that we especially enjoy them when they come around (such as holidays, or eating the first fruit of a season). 
 Blessings for Commandments 
 Jews consider the Torah to be the greatest gift of all, and the act of performing a mitzvah is an act of channeling Divine energy into the mundane. This is a very appropriate time to declare God’s increased presence in the world through this act. 
 Blessings of Experience 
 They are called “blessings of sight  or “of hearing,  but I’d call them “blessings of awe.  These are the blessings we make when we see or hear something that reminds us of God’s presence in the world. For example, when I hear a roll of thunder, I recite: “Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, whose strength and might fills the world.  When I see a streak of lightening, or experience an earthquake, or see an especially mighty mountain or river, I recite: “… who performs an act of creation.  When I see the Mediterranean Sea for the first time in 30 days, I say: “… who created the Great Sea.  
 There is a special blessing for seeing a rainbow, which refers to the story of Noah: “… who remembers the covenant, and is faithful in His covenant, and keeps His promise.  The promise and covenant are: “And it shall come to pass, when I bring clouds over the earth, and the rainbow is seen in the cloud, that I will remember My covenant, which is between Me and you and every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.  (Genesis 9:14-15) 
 There is another special blessing that we make on flowering fruit trees, only during the month of Nisan (your birth month!): “… who has made nothing lacking in His world, and created within it good creations and good trees for the sons of Adam to enjoy.  
 Another blessing of note is Birkat HaGomel; a blessing we say when we have been saved from a potentially life-threatening situation, such as surviving a dangerous illness or childbirth. We are required to say this blessing in front of at least ten people, because when God performs a miracle, we have an obligation to spread knowledge of it as much as we can. (This concept – pirsumei nisa, “publicizing the miracle  in Aramaic – is familiar from the holiday of Hanukkah. We display our chanukiyot in a prominent window facing the street for this reason.) The person who was saved says: “Blessed are You, Lord, Our God, King of the Universe, who bestows kindness upon the culpable, for He has bestowed kindness upon me.  Those in attendance answer, “Amen. May He who has bestowed kindness upon you, always bestow kindness upon you.  
 There are blessings for seeing an especially wise person; for seeing a king; for seeing a group of 600,000 Jews gathered in one place (which has to do with the number of Israelites gathered at Mt. Sinai); for seeing a place where a miracle happened for the Jewish people (such as the Red Sea, the walls of Jericho, or the Jordan river crossing); for seeing a place where a miracle happened to that individual or to his parents; for seeing especially beautiful people or creations, or for seeing especially unusual-looking people or creations… and for hearing good news, (“… hatov v’hameytiv,  “…who is good and does good ), or bad news (“… dayan haemet,  “… the True Judge. ) 
 There is even a blessing for going to the bathroom: (“… who created man with wisdom and created within him many openings and many cavities. It is exposed and known before Your Throne of Glory, that if one of them were to be ruptured or one of them were to be blocked it would be impossible to survive and to stand before You for even one hour. Blessed are You, Lord, Healer of all flesh who acts wondrously. ) As we are painfully reminded every time we have a stomach virus, properly functioning personal plumbing is definitely something to be grateful for! 
 Basically, as the rabbi in Fiddler on the Roof says, there truly is a blessing for everything. 
 Or should I say… in everything. 
 Because the whole purpose of making a blessing is to look deep into the world we live in, and find God in it. 
 Excerpted from Letters to Josep: An Introduction to Judaism a collection of letters from a religious Jew in Israel to a Christian friend in Barcelona describing life as an Orthodox Jew. Equal parts lighthearted and insightful, it's a thorough and entertaining introduction to the basic concepts of Judaism. 
 Learned some new blessings for something or occasion I did not know. I certainly will now frequently recite the blessing for having been saved from/in a life-threatening situation. This has been many times the case. And I love telling of it although there may not always be exactly 10 persons present at one time. But the miracles which have saved my life so many times I have shared with many hundres of people. This is a wonfderful article. 
 Now I have a question: Are there also curses written which we recite over a situation or person meriting to be cursed? 
 Great 
 Very delightful and informative 
 (11) Kevin Kraft, April 20, 2020 7:43 AM 
 Thanks for this! I have often had a problem with those who would translate or say that "blessed" means "happy." That wouldn't make sense to me because of verses like, "Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted" and other verses that seem to negate "happy" as being at least the present state. I had always wondered if the word "fortunate" might be a more suitable synonym. What is your opinion? 
 (10) NM, February 21, 2020 7:33 AM 
 Wow. That was so beautiful and well written 
 Is there a blessing to say when you read a very insightful, mind-blowing article? :) 
 (9) Franklin Kaye, October 2, 2019 9:48 AM 
 Can a non jew answer Omein? 
 If I am in a meeting with non jewish colleagues and I make a Bracha over food can they answer Omein 
 (8) Paul V., May 31, 2019 3:59 PM 
 Love this teaching/article! 
 I thoroughly enjoyed exploring the rich and bountiful heritage of Jewish faith and tradition and devotion to God. As a Christian I have much to learn. Thank you very much. 
 (7) Richard Collins, March 21, 2019 1:45 AM 
 Law 
 All you need is love. 
 (6) Golda Harrison, February 4, 2018 5:03 PM 
 Thank you Daniella for sharing with us and expanding my horizon in what is a Jewish blessing. I enjoyed your article and the understanding it helped bring. Blessings! 
 (5) Anonymous, March 7, 2017 1:42 AM 
 Amen! Excellent article and very well written! Thanks for posting! 
 (4) richard, July 17, 2016 12:33 PM 
 Our species 
 We are surrounded by miracles and wonders. From the life of single cell organisms to mankind and the wonderful world and universe in which we live. What I don't understand is why we need to have a lack or worse a negative in order to appreciate the positive. Why could we not have been created with gratitude and an instinct to do good. 
 (3) Mutale David, July 15, 2016 8:53 AM 
 Good information 
 The topic is very good and i have learnt a lot about Blessing God for all what is has done in the world 
 (2) Helen Schwab (Chaiah), July 14, 2016 10:50 PM 
 Great! 
 Thank you for such a great reminder of what blessings mean! 
 (1) Yaakov Novograd, July 14, 2016 11:26 AM 
 Wonderfully written! 
 I "happened" upon this essay a few hours after I introduced my "chavrusa" to several blessings, as we enjoyed Baltimore's annual Partners-in-Torah bar-b-q. Thank you for helping me continue the "conversation"! 
 Submit Your Comment: 
 Name:* 
 Display my name? 
 Yes No 
 Email:* 
 Your email address is kept private. Our editor needs it in case we have a question about your comment. 
 One Line Summary: 
 Comments:* 
 * required field 2000 
 Please sign me up for Aish.com's free email updates. 
 Our weekly email is chockful of interesting and relevant insights into Jewish history, food, philosophy, current events, holidays and more. Sign up now. Impress your friends with how much you know. 
 We will never share your email address and you can unsubscribe in a single click. 

 id="file23242781" filename="critical-theology" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://readingreligion.org/books/critical-theology">
 Introducing an Agenda for an Age of Global Crisis 
 Review 
 Carl Raschke has spent his entire career at the intersection of theology, social theory, political philosophy, and the hurly-burly of practiced American religion, and in his 75th year he remains as provocative and insightful as ever. His recent primer, Critical Theology, is a welcome handbook for those with philosophical backgrounds seeking to ground their study of the Frankfurt school with something like Jürgen Moltmann’s liberation theology, or for those of a theological bent trying to grapple with the dense social critiques of a continental philosopher like Slavoj Žižek. Of course, the main purpose of the book is to introduce the agenda of critical theologians to a wider audience (presumably a wider, reformed, and evangelical Christian audience since the publisher is IVP). In carrying out this task Raschke is lucid in his explanations and mostly convincing in his call to action. 
 Critical Theology begins with a brief historical synopsis that covers the major events and responses Raschke sees as milestones in the development of what has coalesced today into a coherent field of thought. Monuments like Barth, Habermas, Heidegger, Bultmann, Marcuse, and Horkheimer are all touched on, if somewhat episodically, in order to draw a connecting line between French and German Marxist philosophy and the development of critical theological voices in the middle of the 20th century. 
 The middle portion of the book lays out a compelling answer to what Raschke suggests is the first task for any good critical theologian: “Recognizing that there is a crisis  (42). To support this, Raschke proposes a marked symmetry between the cultural crisis of the middle of the 20th century and the challenges facing the present. He draws on the works of Taubes and Arendt to tie an extended line between the “automated thought processing  of Arendt’s reports from Eichmann’s trial (45) and Taubes’s sense of theology as the janus face of the political (57), to the present where dissent from the norms of political correctness is perilous and politics itself has been substituted in the public sphere as an all-encompassing social discourse. 
 The final two chapters, which make up nearly half the book, are spent weaving together Raschke’s proposed responses to the socio-political crisis he has identified. Here, Raschke’s colors fly with vigor and verve. His first target is the field of religious studies itself, wracked with a 19th century protestant eurocentrism masquerading as 20th century empiricism (113-14). This uncritical approach has led to, in his estimation, “the almost total eclipse of the philosophy of religion within the study of religion.  As a result, “though religion is almost by definition what Jürgen Habermas would term a system of ‘communicative action,’ no effort has been made to deploy the exploding genre of communication theory in the analysis of religious phenomena  (115). 
 To this, Raschke proposes turning focus away from religion and toward “religion : not in an emotive, spiritualist way à la the boomer hippies of the 1960’s, but in a critical and semiotic way that deploys the existentialist conundrum Raschke draws from Hereclitus: “What do we mean by logos?  This is a question in which, as he suggests, “questions of theory, questions of theology and questions of philosophy  all find their origin (127). At the core of this “religious  sense Raschke, echoing Kierkegaard, writes that we must acknowledge and take seriously the very potent “force of God  (128): the world changing, culture shaping force most singularly manifested by the resurrection of Christ event and its reverberations over the last two millennia. 
 Raschke’s primer provides an excellent description of how critical theology and critical theory have been and continue to grow more intertwined. He lays out in clear detail how some of the major figures like Badiou, Žižek, Habermas, and Weber have influenced and interacted with the field, and presses a compelling vision of how new theologians and theorists could carry the torch of these thinkers. But one wonders if anything in Raschke’s formulation of critical theology’s future could evoke the same simple wonder—carry the same “force of God —­­as a Jewish rabbi saying, “Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.  The same question applies to the saying, “Follow me and I will make you fishers of men —words that have compelled so many billions to reimagine and renegotiate the world. What is lost in the conundrum of academia’s endless complications and critical re-imaginings around theology is that what we take for granted today as normative was itself a critical reevaluation. The (Christian) “religion  Raschke’s critical theology is meant to engage with and repurpose into a grand critique of the crisis inhering in the present social and political milieu is, at its core, already meant to be a rebuke to the powers that be. And it is not clear how, if in any way other than nomenclature, Raschke thinks critical theology should remain moored to that tradition. 
 About the Reviewer(s): 
 Michael Raubach is a doctoral candidate in Reception Theory at Aarhus University. 
 Date of Review: 
 October 9, 2018 
 About the Author(s)/Editor(s)/Translator(s): 
 Carl A. Raschke is professor of religious studies at the University of Denver, specializing in continental philosophy, the philosophy of religion, and the theory of religion. 
 Comments 
 Reading Religion welcomes comments from AAR members, and you may leave a comment below by logging in with your AAR Member ID and password. Please read our policy on commenting. 

 id="file23242812" filename="Cross-Yourself" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.wikihow.com/Cross-Yourself">
 Log in 
 Social login does not work in incognito and private browsers. Please log in with your username or email to continue. 
 This article was co-authored by wikiHow Staff. Our trained team of editors and researchers validate articles for accuracy and comprehensiveness. wikiHow's Content Management Team carefully monitors the work from our editorial staff to ensure that each article is backed by trusted research and meets our high quality standards. 
 There are 9 references cited in this article, which can be found at the bottom of the page. 
 wikiHow marks an article as reader-approved once it receives enough positive feedback. In this case, 93% of readers who voted found the article helpful, earning it our reader-approved status. 
 Crossing oneself is a common practice for Christians in liturgical churches, especially but not limited to the Eastern Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Lutheran, and Anglican (Episcopal) churches. It is used to begin and end prayers and ceremonies, as well as occasionally as a stand-alone practice of asking God to bless oneself. Many Christians also make the sign of the cross when they hear the name of the Blessed Trinity. 
 Follow this tradition in Latin Rite and Protestant churches. This method is more common in the Western Catholic Church, and in Protestant traditions that support the sign of the cross, including most Anglican and Lutheran churches.[1] X Research source [2] X Research source 
 Lift your right hand. Many worshippers make the sign of the cross with an open hand, their five fingers reminding them of the five wounds of Christ. Others raise the index and middle fingers together, symbolizing Christ's divine and human natures.[3] X Research source The thumb is often bent to touch the ring finger in the two-finger position. 
 Many other hand shapes are also in use. There is no requirement to make a specific hand shape, but most leaders encourage you to follow your congregation's tradition unless you derive a spiritual benefit from another form. 
 Advertisement 
 3 
 Touch the fingertips of your right hand to your forehead. The sign of the cross is made in many contexts, both privately and in church. At the start of worship or when blessing yourself outside of church, it is usually accompanied by an invocation of the Holy Trinity. Begin "In the name of the Father..."[4] X Research source 
 Or in Latin: "In nomine Patris..." 
 4 
 Touch the center of your chest. Bring your hand down to your sternum. Say "and of the Son..." Some people place their left hand on their breast during the sign, and touch the right hand a little higher than it.[5] X Research source 
 Latin: "...et Filii..." 
 5 
 Touch the front of your left shoulder. Say "And of the Holy... 
 Latin: "...et Spiritus..." 
 Touch your right shoulder in roughly the same location. Say "...Spirit." 
 Latin: "...Sancti." 
 7 
 Say "Amen". You may place your hands together. 
 In many Latin countries, it is common to make the small cross with your thumb (see below) and kiss it before saying Amen. In the Philippines, this gesture has evolved into simply touching the thumb to the chin. 
 8 
 Learn the small cross. Some of the first Christians to bless themselves formed a cross with their thumb and index finger and placed it on their forehead.[6] X Research source Today, Roman Catholics make the sign with the same hand shape before the Gospel reading at Mass. Place the small cross first on your forehead, then on your lips, then on your breast. 
 There are many interpretations for this blessing. One common one asks you to approach the Gospels with an open mind, confess them with your mouth, and safeguard it in your heart. 
 9 
 Bless yourself when entering a church. If you are part of the Latin Rite, it is traditional to bless yourself when you walk into a church. Dip your fingers in the font of holy water, then make the sign of the cross. You may use the large or the small cross. 
 Many Catholics also bless themselves when walking past a church, and after receiving communion. 
 Advertisement 
 Method 2 
 Method 2 of 2: 
 Eastern Tradition 
 1 
 Hold your right thumb, index, and middle fingertips together. In Eastern Orthodox and Byzantine Catholic churches, most people use the three-finger blessing. Your fingers represent the Three Persons of the Holy Trinity, brought together in the Godhead. Tuck the other two fingers into the palm of your hand, representing the Two Natures of Jesus Christ (meaning He is fully human and fully divine).[7] X Research source This ancient practice likely dates back to the 400s.[8] X Research source 
 2 
 Bring your hand from your forehead to the top of your stomach. First bring your hand to your forehead, then down to your solar plexus. Some people place it on their chest instead, as in the Western tradition, but others are concerned that this makes an inverted cross, with a short lower end. (The inverted cross traditionally symbolizes humility, but has been used by anti-Christian groups.[9] X Research source ) 
 You can instead bring your hand all the way to touch the ground. This is sometimes used during the Great Fast of Easter, or in times of great trial.[10] X Research source 
 3 
 Cross yourself from right to left. Unlike the Latin tradition, the Eastern cross starts at the right shoulder and ends on the left. This is a tradition from many centuries ago, and was once shared by the Western church.[11] X Research source 
 4 
 Recite a blessing. There are many ways to do this. Here are two examples, separated with slashes to mark where you move your hand: 
 "Lord / Jesus Christ / Son of God / have mercy on us."[12] X Research source 
 “My hope is the Father. / My refuge is the Son. / My protection is the Holy Spirit. / Holy Trinity Glory to Thee. [13] X Research source 
 Why do many Catholics kiss their fingers after making the sign of the cross? 
 Community Answer 
 When we make the Sign of the Cross, we form our fingers in one of several ways to form some aspect of the Holy Trinity or of Christ and His five wounds (if we use all five fingers). In essence, to kiss our fingers afterward is to render a kiss to God. 
 Is it okay to make the sign of the cross during recessions and processions, or anytime the crucifix passes by? 
 Leo Boivin 
 Community Answer 
 Even though there are times when the sign of the cross is mandatory, there are no particular moments when it is not proper. 
 Am I allowed to cross myself if I am just a Christian without any affiliation? 
 Community Answer 
 You are welcome to cross yourself even if you are not Catholic since it's a form of prayer. However, I would highly recommend that you research the Sign of the Cross to truly understand what you are proclaiming through this action and prayer. I would also suggest you look into Catholicism since your desire to cross yourself may be a sign from God to join his Church. 
 Can I pray my own prayers after receiving the Holy Communion? 
 Community Answer 
 Of course! You are welcome to pray as much or as little as you want after receiving Communion. 
 Would it be offensive if I were to cross myself while acting? I play a Catholic and don't want to offend anyone. 
 Community Answer 
 No, if you're playing a Catholic in the theatre you're allowed to cross yourself, as long as it's done properly and in the right context. 
 Can I make the sign of the cross with my left hand if I am unable to do so with my right? 
 Community Answer 
 Yes, the Church accommodates everyone regardless of their limitations or handicaps. 
 There are many different traditions among churches. When in doubt, observe your neighbors or refer to the missal provided by the church. Western Catholics genuflect (kneel) on the right knee when looking at the Tabernacle, and kneel on both knees at various points during Mass, including when receiving Communion. 
 The Latin method goes up, down, left, right; the Byzantine method goes up, down, right, left. 
 Video . 
 By using this service, some information may be shared with YouTube. 
 Tips 
 Oriental Orthodox churches typically make the sign from left to right, as in the Western tradition, but sometimes use the Eastern hand shape or their own traditions (such as one finger to symbolize Christ's one nature). This also applies to the Eastern Catholic churches from the same countries — that is, in the Alexandrian, Armenian, and Syrian Rites. 
 The words or "formula" can be said out loud or silently, depending on the situation. 
 About This Article 
 This article was co-authored by wikiHow Staff. Our trained team of editors and researchers validate articles for accuracy and comprehensiveness. wikiHow's Content Management Team carefully monitors the work from our editorial staff to ensure that each article is backed by trusted research and meets our high quality standards. This article has been viewed 559,231 times. 
 To cross yourself following the Western tradition, lift your right hand and bring it to your forehead. Then touch the center of your chest. Reach over to touch your left shoulder and then back to your right shoulder. For churches in the Eastern tradition, start by touching your forehead and chest in the same way. Then touch your right shoulder before the left. To finish making the sign of the cross, place your hands together, and say, “Amen.  If you want to learn what prayers to say while you're crossing yourself, keep reading the article! 
 Thanks to all authors for creating a page that has been read 559,231 times. 
 Reader Success Stories 
 Cass J. 
 Aug 16, 2019 
 "I was uncertain of the "right way" to cross myself. I got my answer and continued to research all the information on the subject. I learned quite a number of things about denominations and differences between Eastern and Western practices."..." more 
 Did this article help you? 
 Yes No 
 Advertisement 
 Cookies make wikiHow better. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our cookie policy. 
 % of people told us that this article helped them. 
 Cass J. 
 Aug 16, 2019 
 "I was uncertain of the "right way" to cross myself. I got my answer and continued to research all the information on the subject. I learned quite a number of things about denominations and differences between Eastern and Western practices."..." more 
 Anonymous 
 Feb 14, 2018 
 "Explains Lent without using words I might not understand. Your explanation was very helpful and prompted me to keep reading."..." more 
 Anudeep Navaratnakumar 
 Mar 2, 2017 
 "I've learned from you, how to cross myself, feeling really blessed, and I'm thankful to all of you. May God bless you, too."..." more 
 Anonymous 
 Sep 18, 2017 
 "That you touch the center and not the left first helped. Thank you so much and stay blessed." 
 Anonymous 
 Jan 20, 2018 
 "Both the written explanation, including variations and the how to videos helped. " 
 By signing up you are agreeing to receive emails according to our privacy policy. 

 id="file23242721" filename="deuteronomic-theology-rewards-punishment.php" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.blogos.org/theologyapologetics/deuteronomic-theology-rewards-punishment.php">
 Deuteronomic Theology 
 Rewards and Punishments 
 Deuteronomy is the basis of Judaism and is distinct from the other Mosaic texts of Exodus, Leviticus, and Numbers because it has more emphasis on "loving" God and includes the beginnings of constitutionalism, which means deference to the law because it reflects the unchanging principles of God. The theology of Deuteronomy is that the Israelites will know whether He favors them based on whether they've kept His law. This is a significant step beyond the theology of Numbers, which seems based more on trial and error as it tells horrible stories of how God took revenge on the nation in unpredictable ways. In Deuteronomic theology, people don't discern His will by trial and error, because the law already has been recorded, so people can know His will from generation to generation without having to rely as much on oral recollection and standing stones. (Standing stones were monuments for recalling what a place's supernatural significance is: how God did some miracle at that place, and why.) While faith is based on recalling events based on the name origins of locations in the Book of Joshua, Deuteronomy seeks to establish people's faith based on divine moral principles, and the potential advantages and disadvantages to each individual. 
 There is something remarkable about Deuteronomy 32:30: "How could one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, unless their Rock had sold them, and the Lord had given them up?" In the context, the Israelites are militarily superior but still are defeated by their enemies. Even when Israel has the military advantage, they will lose, unless they are obeying the covenant God gave to them. It is somewhat inspiring to read this, because it shows a lot of faith that they can defeat enemies when they're outnumbered, and that they can lose when it seems like they have the military advantage, all dependent on whether God favors them. I don't so much admire their belief that God dictates the outcome, because religious belief in something to explain outcomes is a natural "crutch" our minds have, but I admire how they don't trust in their own military power because they believe God's moral principles are of greater worth than military power. Ecclesiastes 9:18a says "Wisdom is better than weapons of war." The roots of this are in Deuteronomy's understanding of God blessing or cursing the nation in accordance with whether they keep His law (synonymous with covenant). The potential positive outcome is given in a hyperbolic way (poetically exaggerated) in Leviticus 26:7-8 (a chapter of blessings and curses similar to Deuteronomy 28): "But you will chase your enemies and they will fall before you by the sword; five of you will chase a hundred, and a hundred of you will chase ten thousand, and your enemies will fall before you by the sword." 
 By the time Deuteronomy was in its final form, the Israelites understand the importance of discerning God's character through moral laws, instead of just trial and error ("This bad outcome happened, and so God must've been angry with me for some reason I'll have to figure out"). From that point on, the debate becomes more about the meaning and relevance of the law instead of its origin. The Bible doesn't record any major debate in the monarchial period about whether God had created the Mosaic Law. The people's moral compromise was severe in that they got into child sacrifice and sexual licentiousness with the cult of Baal-Asherah. There was plenty in the Mosaic Law which the prophets could refer to for calling the people to holiness, without having to delve into the origin — whether it was written by Moses and whether its narrative could be trusted, etc. Jumping ahead to the 1800's, the American people had no questions about whether the Founding Fathers really believed the Declaration of Independence. Their debates prior to the Civil War were about how the Founders viewed "Negroes" with reference to the Declaration's ideals, and whether the Founders' views were even relevant to an "enlightened" society which recognized the God-given inferiority of black people. This demonstrates that even when the historical origin of a nation's founding creed is undisputed, people will still reject the law because of their sin. The Declaration of Independence has a clear historical orientation to time and place and people. It is based on Jesus' teachings that every individual matters, that leaders are to be servants, and that no people group, age group, or gender is inherently better than another. The Mosaic covenant is great if you stick with the 10 Commandments and the blessings and curses on the nation in Deuteronomy, but dangerous if you venture beyond that in establishing universal moral principles. 
 Aspen Sky photo courtesy Kersley Fitzgerald 2011-2021 blogos. all rights reserved. 

 id="file23242590" filename="did-god-bless-america-because-it-blessed-israel" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://theologyfirst.org/did-god-bless-america-because-it-blessed-israel/">
 Does God Bless America Because It Blesses Israel? 
 Whenever Israel comes under attack from one of their enemies (as is happening as I write this), you will see Christians on social media encouraging others to pray for Israel, or to pray for the peace of Israel. Why? Not that this isn’t a good thing. Of course it is. But why do they request prayer specifically for Israel? Why are they so concerned about Israel? 
 Five reasons: 
 One, it’s because they believe the nation of Israel are still the people of God. Two, they believe Genesis 12:3 still refers to that nation. Three, they want to be faithful to Psalm 122:6. Four, they don’t want America to lose God’s blessing (Ge 12:3). Five, they believe that Israel has a key role in end time prophecy. 
 They (dispensational Christians) have this understanding about Israel, because they still view Israel through the lens of the OT. However, this is not the view of the NT. Let’s do a comparison between the two Testaments: 
 (Genesis 12:1-3) – 1 Now the Lord had said to Abram: “Get out of your country, from your family and from your father’s house, To a land that I will show you. 2 I will make you a great nation; I will bless you and make your name great; And you shall be a blessing. 3 I will bless those who bless you, and I will curse him who curses you; and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed.  (NKJV) 
 When God made this promise to Abram (Abraham), that He would “bless those who bless you, and I will curse him who curses you,  to whom was God referring? For sure, this promise applied to the nation of Israel, to the ethnic Jews that would come through Abraham’s line under the Old Covenant. However, in Galatians chapter 3 (also Romans 4), Paul reveals that this promise had a wider application under the New Covenant: 
 (Gal 3:7-9) – 7 Know then that it is those of faith who are the sons of Abraham. 8 And the Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the gospel beforehand to Abraham, saying, “In you shall all the nations be blessed.  9 So then, those who are of faith are blessed along with Abraham, the man of faith. (ESV) 
 (Gal 3:14-16) – 14 so that in Christ Jesus the blessing of Abraham might come to the Gentiles, so that we might receive the promised Spirit through faith. 15 To give a human example, brothers: even with a man-made covenant, no one annuls it or adds to it once it has been ratified. 16 Now the promises were made to Abraham and to his offspring. It does not say, “And to offsprings,  referring to many, but referring to one, “And to your offspring,  who is Christ. (ESV) 
 (Gal 3:29) – 29 And if you are Christ’s, then you are Abraham’s offspring, heirs according to promise. (ESV) 
 Paul reveals that when God made the promise of Genesis 12:1-3 to Abraham, He ultimately had His Son and those who are in Him in view — those who place their faith in Him, both Jew and Gentile. This promise was completely fulfilled in Christ and His Church (Fulfillment Theology). Therefore, when God says that He will “bless those who bless you, and I will curse him who curses you,  today (since the time of Christ) this applies to the people of Christ, not to the ethnic people of Israel. Likewise, when God says that “in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed  (Ge 12:3), this was fulfilled in Christ and in those who place their faith in Him (Ga 3:7-9). 
 Therefore, when Christians today apply this “blessing or cursing  to the nation of Israel, they’re misapplying it. It no longer refers to the blessing or cursing of those who bless or curse the people of Israel, but to Christ and the people of Christ in Him, which together, make up the Church. 
 Some (many?) dispensationalists believe that this type of theology encourages anti-Semitism. While it may be true of some who hold to Fulfillment Theology, that is not something I condone. Shame on those of whom it is true. I actually support Israel. I respect that they are a free country and are a strong ally of America, and that they allow Christianity to be practiced in their country. More importantly, if one understands the unity between the OT and the NT, there’s no way a Christian could ever be anti-Jew, especially when you consider the fact that Jesus Himself came through the line of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob — and that the early membership of the Church consisted entirely or almost entirely of Jewish believers. 
 However, one can not or should not support or “bless  Israel (Ge 12:2-3) unconditionally. Because, first of all, as I already explained, Genesis 12:1-3 ultimately refers to Christ and His Church, not to the nation of Israel. Furthermore, if dispensationalists insist that this promise to bless or curse refers strictly to the treatment of the nation of Israel, then they have a real problem. What if Israel becomes a terrorist nation, such as Iran? While that may be highly unlikely, what if they did? What if they turn against Christians, like Iran has? Are they going to continue to give their support to Israel? But if they don’t support Israel, aren’t they setting themselves up to be “cursed?  But how could they rightly give their support (blessing) to a terrorist nation, which also outlaws Christianity? There is a real conflict here that dispensationalists must consider. 
 I believe the only way that people could ever bless Israel unconditionally, is if that promise ultimately and actually has Christ and His Church in view. Christ’s Church will never become a terrorist organization, or anything else evil — for she is pure and holy, set-apart to Christ. This cannot be said of the nation of Israel. They are, in fact, already evil and always have been, and can possibly become much more evil. That is why God destroyed both the Northern and Southern Kingdoms of Israel. Of course their greatest evil is their rejection of Jesus as their Messiah. That is why He destroyed them in AD 70. That is their history. However, in modern times, they’re not evil in the same sense terrorist nations are, and certainly no more evil than the United States, or any other country, generally speaking (Ro 3:22-23; Ro 11:32). 
 In truth, if Israel ever turned completely against Christianity and America – which consists of many millions of Christians – I believe the “curse  of Genesis 12:3 would instead be upon them. In fact, because of their rejection of Jesus, the curse of that promise is already upon them (Ro 11:7-10,25; 2 Cor 3:13-16). But if they were to ever turn against Christians as many other countries have, then I believe the “curse  of that promise would increase further. 
 Now consider this! What an amazing revelation we have here. Israel rejected Christ and Christianity, and the result is that “a hardening has come upon part of Israel  (NRSV – Ro 11:25). Now I confess that I don’t understand all that is involved with this hardening, but I do know that it’s a judgment against this people — as evidenced by God’s judgement against them in AD 70 (Matt 21:42-44; Lu 17:25). Yet, according to Genesis 12:3, the “curse  is reserved for those who curse Israel! Yet, God destroyed Israel, for a third time! Does that not strongly (if not obviously) indicate that Genesis 12:3 actually has Christ and His Church in view? The true people God? When you stop and think about it, this is a very strong argument against Dispensationalism, is it not? 
 In regard to God’s rejection of Israel and turning to the Church (Matt 21:42-44) – consisting of both believing Jews and believing Gentiles – lest dispensationalists quote Romans 11:1-2, God has not rejected individual Jews. That is quite obvious. It was the corporate people of Israel that God rejected, not individual Jews. That’s what Paul is referring to in Romans 11:1-2. God’s focus turned away from the nation of Israel to His Church, through whom the gospel of Jesus Christ would be spread to the whole world. 
 In regard to this “blessing and cursing  as it relates to America, let’s be clear about this. God has not historically blessed America because she supports Israel. I believe God has blessed America because she has always supported Christianity. Many Christians seem to believe that if America turns against Israel, God will withdraw His blessing. First of all, I don’t believe America would ever do that without just cause (terrorism, attack on our country, etc). Secondly, I believe God would only withdraw His blessing from America if it turned against Christ and His people — something we’re already seeing develop, more and more. 
 Therefore, the people who are ultimately in view in Genesis 12:2-3, are God’s true people, which are those who are in Christ of the New Covenant. Dispensationalists who are always quoting the Genesis promise to “bless  Israel, seem to elevate the importance of that nation above the Church. While they may certainly deny such an idea, the reality is, we never hear them use that passage in regard to Christ’s Church, who are the true representatives of God in the world. At least I’ve never heard them make that reference. But why not? There should be no debate about who the true people of God are, that they are those who have embraced His Son — whom Israel rejects. So how does Genesis 12:3 not apply to God’s people in Christ during this present age? 
 So then, while I support Israel, I do so because they are a free country (allowing the practice of Christianity) like America and are one of our strongest allies. I do so because Jesus came through that line of people, and that Christianity began with Jewish believers. But I don’t support that nation unconditionally. However, I do support Christ’s Church unconditionally — and that is the only way that Genesis 12:3 can ever be applied unconditionally, and for all time. 

 id="file23242824" filename="difference-between-theology-and-religious-studies" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://askanydifference.com/difference-between-theology-and-religious-studies/">
 Difference Between Theology and Religious Studies (With Table) 
 Theology and religious studies are two branches of academics. The common notion prevails that both are studies of gods and religions, but that is incorrect. The theme of these two cases is completely diverse from each other. A detailed description of these two might wipe out the confusion. 
 Theology vs Religious Studies 
 The difference between theology and religious studies is that theology focuses on the systematic study of the divine power or supernatural forces, and religious studies focus on human dimensions of religion rather than rituals and scriptures that humans have made. 
 Theology is the systematic study done in universities on the nature of gods and religious belief. Theology tries to answer the question asked in religion. Theology is thinking about questions that are raised by and about religion. Theology is trying to find the answer to the questions through the counsel of the divine. 
 Religious studies, or the study of religion, is the academic field that is dedicated to research into religious beliefs and behaviour. It is not seen from one religious perspective. Rather, it studies multiple religions and their history. Methods of this study include the study of religion based on anthropology, sociology, psychology, and philosophy. 
 Comparison Table Between Theology and Religious Studies 
 What is Theology? 
 The word theology comes from Greek words. Its literal meaning is ‘word of god’. This academic discipline is studied in universities, seminaries as well as schools of divinity. Theology allows understanding religious concepts and practices more adequately. 
 Theologians study various rituals, ceremonies, and scriptures so that they get to know more about the divine power. This divine power can be gods or deities, depending on the religion. Theology is the systematic study of divine and religious belief. 
 Theologians discuss scriptures and develop various hypothetical arguments. Theologians try to find answers to various questions. For instance, if the question is ‘how to achieve salvation, then a theologian will try to find the answer based on a particular religion that he is following. So if the theologians consult Buddhism, then they can search for the answer to the question based on the given instructions in the religious scriptures of Buddhism. 
 What is Religious Studies? 
 Religious studies do not study religion. This subject observes the background of a particular time and assesses the current situation of that time, and tries to evaluate why people chose one particular religion over others. 
 It studies behaviours and institutions. It describes and explains religions and compares them with each other. This subject adopts a cross-cultural perspective. 
 To explain this with an example, we can say that it will study a particular region of a particular period and see which religion was the most popular and had a major influence on society and why. 
 It will try to research and explain why a certain religion grew stronger than others in one period. If a religion became widespread because it was offering salvation easily, then religious studies will attempt to find out the cause behind the obsession of gaining salvation among the people of that time. This study will connect sociology, philosophy, and psychology with religion. 
 Main Differences Between Theology and Religious Studies 
 Theology is the systematic study done on the nature of gods, deities, and religious rites and traditions. On the other hand, religious studies are the academic field that is dedicated to research into religious beliefs, behaviours, and backgrounds. 
 Theology analyses religious rituals and texts or scriptures and tries to search for the answers to divinity-related questions. Whereas religious studies analyze the background and history of the religions rather than the beliefs and scriptures. 
 One needs to believe in religion in order to prove the facts mentioned in the scriptures. But one does not need to believe in any religion to study religious studies. Rather it is better if the person does not have any inclination towards any religion. 
 Theology tries to prove that religions have significance and humans can lead a better life with their help. On the contrary, religious studies only research religions in the context of society and civilization. 
 Theology only focuses on religion and its scriptures. Whereas religious studies focus on history, philosophy, psychology, and sociology connected with religions. It studies the background of a particular time and assesses the current situation of that time, and tried to evaluate why people chose one particular religion over others. 
 Conclusion 
 Religion is very significant among the masses. Religion acts as a pacifier to the common people. People cling to religion to find meaning in their lives. Religions offer people hope and aspirations. Theology helps in this case as it tries to find all the solutions from the books of religion. 
 Religious studies, on the other hand, focus more on the outside of the books of religion. It studies and observes society and its beliefs rather than the scriptures and rituals. Both of these streams of academics have their value and fulfil their purposes sufficiently. 
 Editorial Staff at Ask Any Difference is a team of experts in the field of "Difference Between" topics and led by Sandeep Bhandari, Piyush Yadav and Chara Yadav. Trusted by over 1.5 million readers worldwide. 
 To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video 

 id="file23242773" filename="disposing-of-blessed-items.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.catholiceducation.org/en/culture/catholic-contributions/disposing-of-blessed-items.html">
 Disposing of Blessed Items 
 FR. WILLIAM SAUNDERS 
 What should I do with my old blessed palm? I also have some broken statues and rosaries that were blessed? Since they are blessed, I am sure that I should not just throw these out. Are there any guidelines? 
 As Catholics, we are accustomed to having religious objects "blessed." Here a bishop or a priest imparts a blessing which signifies the permanent sanctification and dedication of an object for some sacred purpose. This blessing is technically termed "a constitutive blessing." For example when a bishop dedicates, or classically speaking, consecrates, an altar, that altar must only be used for sacred purposes, particularly the offering of the Mass. Or, when a chalice is blessed, it becomes a sacred vessel dedicated solely to sacred usage. Once a religious object is blessed and dedicated for divine worship or veneration, it must be treated with reverence and not be used in either an improper or profane way (cf. Code of Canon Law, no. 1171). 
 However, blessed religious objects break or wear from use. The basic rule for the disposition of these items is to burn or to bury them. During the 1800s, both the Sacred Congregation for the Rites and the Holy Office (now known respectively as the Sacred Congregation for the Sacraments and Divine Worship and the Sacred Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith) issued various determinations concerning this issue. Here are a few examples: A chalice which becomes "unserviceable" is not to be sold, but must be used for some other sacred purpose or melted. Vestments, altar cloths and linens must be destroyed. Polluted or excess holy water must be poured into the ground. Palms are to be burned, and the ashes then used for distribution on Ash Wednesday or returned to the ground. A broken rosary or religious statue normally would be buried. In all, the underlying idea is that what has been dedicated to God should be returned to God. Never should one just "throw out" what has been dedicated to God. 
 Interestingly, this same reasoning governs the disposition of the Holy Eucharist. In each sacristy, there is a sacrarium, which is a sink which does not drain into the sewer system, but directly into the ground. If, for some reason, the priest had to dispose of a Sacred Host, he would completely dissolve the host in water and then rinse it down the sacrarium with water. For instance, once when I was distributing Holy Communion at the nursing home, one of the elderly patients wanted to receive Holy Communion as usual but for some reason on this occasion could not swallow. She proceeded to expectorate the Sacred Host onto a linen purificator. When I returned to the Church, I dissolved and rinsed the Sacred Host down the sacrarium with water. 
 Living in a society where things have become so disposable, we must not forget those religious objects that have been blessed and dedicated to God and for sacred use. My heart breaks every time I enter an antique store and I see a chalice, a reliquary (sometimes still containing a relic), vestments and other sacred objects that were one time used for the Holy Mass. I have to wonder, "What was someone thinking to just dispose of these items in this way?" They should have tried to find these religious objects a new home in a mission Church or have disposed of them in the proper way. Please be sure to always cherish the blessed religious objects at home, venerate them with piety, and when necessary, dispose of them properly. 
 Acknowledgement 
 Saunders, Rev. William. "Disposing of Blessed Items." Arlington Catholic Herald. 
 This article is reprinted with permission from Arlington Catholic Herald. 
 The Author 
 Father William Saunders is pastor of Our Lady of Hope parish in Potomac Falls, Virginia. He is dean of the Notre Dame Graduate School of Christendom College. The above article is a "Straight Answers" column he wrote for the Arlington Catholic Herald. Father Saunders is the author of Straight Answers, a book based on 100 of his columns, and Straight Answers II. 

 id="file23242718" filename="does-god-bless-the-usa" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://womenintheology.org/2011/05/02/does-god-bless-the-usa/">
 Women in Theology 
 Does God Bless the USA? 
 United Statesians have always claimed to live in a nation blessed by God–white Americans interpreted the near complete destruction of certain Native American communities by smallpox as a sign of God’s blessing, believing that God had cleared the land of its previous inhabitants just for them; white American confidence in this same blessing in turn was seen as license to acquire even more land, even if it meant killing Native Americans in the process. 
 And lately, especially since 9/11, the phrase “God Bless the USA  or “may God Bless the USA  has become a prominent part of the nation’s public discourse. Presidents Bush and Obama have ended every speech with this phrase. 
 But, is it true? Does God Bless the USA? Similarly, is it reasonable to even hope or pray for this? 
 Thankfully, the New Testament, echoing much of the thinking of the Old Testament, is very specific about whom God blesses. In Luke’s Beatitudes, Jesus says: 
 “Blessed are you who are poor, for the kingdom of God is yours. 
 Blessed are you who are now hungry, for you will be satisfied. 
 Blessed are you who are now weeping, for you will laugh. 
 Blessed are you when people hate you, and when they exclude and insult you, and denounce your name as evil on account of the Son of Man. 
 Rejoice and leap for joy on that day! Behold, your reward will be great in heaven. For their ancestors treated the prophets in the same way. 
 But woe to you who are rich, for you have received your consolation. 
 But woe to you who are filled now, for you will be hungry. 
 Woe to you who laugh now, for you will grieve and weep. 
 Woe to you when all speak well of you, for their ancestors treated the false prophets in this way. 
 Similarly, in Matthew’s gospel, Jesus says: 
 “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven 
 Blessed are they who mourn, for they will be comforted. 
 Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the land. 
 Blessed are they who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be satisfied. 
 Blessed are the merciful, for they will be shown mercy. 
 Blessed are the clean of heart, for they will see God. 
 Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called children of God. 
 Blessed are they who are persecuted for the sake of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 Blessed are you when they insult you and persecute you and utter every kind of evil against you (falsely) because of me. 
 Rejoice and be glad, for your reward will be great in heaven. Thus they persecuted the prophets who were before you.  
 In other words, God’s blessing is not bestowed upon whomever asks for it, but upon the poor and those who do justice to the poor. So, only to the extent that the United States is poor, merciful, just, meek, and peaceful can it be justified in expecting or even asking for God’s blessing. 
 However, I do not think that the richest nation on earth can be said to be poor. Nor can a nation with the biggest army in the history of the world be said to be meek. Nor can a nation that acquired its land by stealing it from and or killing those who previously lived on it be said to be just, meek, or peaceful. 
 It would seem therefore that in expecting/asking God to bless the USA, we are not in any way speaking of or to the God who is the Father of Jesus Christ. We seem to be speaking of and to a completely different God, one whom Scripture does not know. 
 As Luke’s gospel makes it clear, from the God of Jesus Christ crucified, a nation like ours receives not blessings, but woes. 
 Share this: 
 Like this: 
 Related 
 18 thoughts 
 The timing of this post is quite interesting – I don’t think you meant it to coincide with Bin Laden’s death, but of course it does. 
 I do not like the use of “God bless the USA.  In December 2001, I had a friend from the UK come to visit me in the NYC area, where I lived at the time. We got into a conversation about the phrase and she said that when she heard it, in her mind at least she’d chime in, “but don’t forget about the rest of your children!  
 This is one of many reasons I self define as Catholic American and not the other way around. 
 Nicely Done! If you haven’t read the sections in Richard Hays section on Luke’s Beatitudes and the Eschatological Reversal….highly recommend it. 
 Now I’d like in part comment on your post and Jarrett’s facebook comment about the poor. I agree with Jarrett that romanticizing poverty is dangerous, but I do not think that is what Luke is doing or what you mean. 
 The primary question, as I see it, is once again the connection with “success  in this world and holiness. Both of these texts, as well as, numerous others severs the ties between success as defined by the dominant culture and success as right relationship with God. Thus, just as the Rich Young Man goes away sad, for he had many possessions (which Clement of Alexandria interprets as Jesus’ severing the assumptions of material wealth as a signal of holiness) – we in the United States need to remember that POWER and MILITARY MIGHT is no indicator of holiness. 
 Does God bless the USA? – To answer that question we need to show that we are in right relationship with God, neighbor and creation? But learning from the Biblical Prophets – if we look for material and dominant culture indications for that “blessing  we are likely to be soorly disappointed at the Last Judgement – as we’ll be judged by how we treat the LEAST not the levels of our power. 
 Surely, although I think you might not understand what a “blood libel  is. 
 But yes, I will provide some citations. 
 As to white settlers’ belief that the decimation of native americans by smallpox was a sign of God’s favor, see John Winthrop, one of the Puritans leader and the first governor of the colony that became the state of Massachusetts. He said that the natives were all “dead of the smallpox, so as the Lord hath cleared our title to what we possess.  This is found in the on page 242 of the book “John Winthrop: America’s Forgotten Founding Father  and you can verify it here: 
 Also, John Winthrop also referred to the Puritans as coming to the new world to build a “city on a hill,  a clear and explicit statement of his belief that the Puritans had replaced Israel as God’s chosen people. You can read the text of that speech here: http://www.mtholyoke.edu/acad/intrel/winthrop.htm 
 As to white euro-americans killing native americans to take their land (or simply forcing them to leave), you can check out the whole Trail of Tears incident, which is surely the most well-known but not by any stretch the only example. 
 You can also check out andrew jackson’s lawless and illegal wars against the Cherokee nation in order to conquer Florida and make it part of the US as well as to eradicate the safe-haven for runaway slaves that the Cherokees were providing. 
 Hope that is helpful and I would love to hear your thoughts after you take a closer look at these sources. 
 I knew to expect something good from the mind of Katie Grimes: it was one of my first thoughts last night while watching John King comment wildly. Thanks. 
 Hope springs eternal?: many or even most of my (well-to-do, Texan, sixteen-year-old) students are also troubled by the nationalistic death jig, even without my prompting. We’re taking time out to read parts of the Letter to Diognetus today: “Christians live in their own countries as though they were only passing through. They play their full role as citizens, but labor under all the disabilities of aliens. Any country can be their homeland, but for them their homeland, wherever it may be, is a foreign country… They pass their days upon earth, but they are citizens of heaven. Obedient to the laws, they yet live on a level that transcends the law.  
 Thank you so much, John! And thank you for sharing with us these signs of hope! 
 What you are doing as a teacher truly inspires and edifies me. I would love to hear more of what your students are thinking about this–especially in the context of the Letter to Diognetus. 
 I don’t think it is necessary to interpret America as a person subject to the Beatitudes of Christianity. America is not a nation consisting entirely of Christians (let alone Christians who take the Beatitudes seriously). The identity of “God  in the prayer/request/mantra/war chant “God Bless America  is ambiguous. 
 In general I think it is okay to say God Bless America, so long as one does not assume this exalts America above all nations or at the expense of other nations. From a Christian perspective, its perfectly fine if one also includes the the proviso that America lives by some general (Christian) principles that are compatible with other religions (I say this with some hesitation because I do not want to imply some kind of Puritan or Christian fundamentalist covenantal theology, the kind discussed after 9/11). 
 I think many, except for Fox news folks, can understand “God  in “God bless America  as a general deity, more or less Christian. Something we can all agree on and appeal to. Having said that, what does it mean when a Native American says the phrase, or when non-Christians say it, or when agnostics say it? 
 Having said that, I think you are right to criticize the phrase insofar as it has been hijacked by certain Christians, especially those who believe more in the gospel of wealth and not the gospel proclaimed by a crucified Messiah. 
 I don’t want to sound like an uncritical apologist. But I do think, in general, that America does quite a bit of good in the world. There is much evil as well–we are responsible for the death of terrorist leaders as well as spiritual leaders like Romero. The prayer for blessing can imply the request both for America’s “glory  and for its greater conformity to ethical standards that promote human flourishing. Perhaps the latter needs to be reemphasized so as to redefine the phrase. 
 For me personally, the fact that the “God  in “God Bless America  can function as “a general deity, more or less Christian  is precisely why Christians should keep their distance from this phrase. If it were clear that the “god  invoked in this phrase were not meant to be the God of Jesus Christ, perhaps it would be ok, (but then I might still wonder why Christians were praying to a God they know doesn’t exist). However, it is precisely because the God of the USA is so easily confused with the God of Jesus Christ and even worse actually controls and defines how we think of God even when we are being intentionally Christian (like in mass or church) that it is so scary to me. 
 And again for me personally, the problem with “GOd Bless America  is not just that it often implies a superiority to other nations, but precisely because we are not the type of nation scripture tells us that God blesses. Scripture does not say that God blesses those nations that do “quite a bit of good in the world  (we might disagree a bit about this) but the poor, the meek, etc, which we are not. 
 And as always, thanks for your comments, and I don’t think you are at all being “an uncritical apologist.  To me, it is clear you are attempting to think through these issues with sincerity and integrity. 
 Thanks for your reply. I appreciate and respect your thoughts. 
 I think, in the spirit of respect for all religions that the prayer God bless the USA can be tolerated and redeemed. This is not so much a submission to the image if a deist god rightly criticized by Johnson but rather an affirmation of the need for religious unity in a post-9/11 world. How Catholics and other Christians interpret the prayer and catechize the faithful remains to be seen. 
 But to use scripture as the criteria for God’s blessing is precisely what evangelical fundamentalists do. I don’t think we should imitate them. Otherwise this just turns into a scripture duel that no one wins. God “abandoned Israel when she sinned. While God also blessed Israel when she followed the covenant, God also blessed and approved the genocide of the Canaanites. You rightly point out how that narrative played out in American history (and is now conveniently forgotten by the Republicans among others). My basic point is that scripture is not a consistent criteria; the prophets themselves are also compromised. They were not made on our modern image. Like scripture itself, we cannot allow fundamentalists to continue to hijack this prayer and other symbols. We need to redefine and reinterpret, not abandon, this potentially powerful means of religious unity. 
 Jennifer, I hear what you are saying about the need to “redefine and reinterpret  the meaning of “God  and not let it be the exclusive domain of “fundamentalists.  But, don’t you think defining God, in alignment with Scripture, as the God who loves the poor preferentially IS a way to redefine and reinterpret? Also, I think, as Christians, we have no choice but to define God in accord with scripture–this does not mean we are fundamentalists–in fact, i think this is part of the problem…the debate has been framed in such a way that we can only conceive of fidelity to scripture as a sort of fundamentalism, when i would argue that fundamentalism or biblical literalism ISN’T actually faithful to scripture but is a distortion of it. 
 Also, I think our biggest point of disagreement is whether or not, in the United States, religion, even the supposedly inclusive one that you favor (but what about atheist americans? ) is that I don’t think religion should be where we find our unity. Instead, it seems as though United Statesians should find their unity first of all in their common humanity and then secondly in a critical approach to the constitution, and thirdly in a commitment to equality and justice. 
 And yes scripture speaks in many different voices and is certainly not a “book of laws.  however, that the prophets thought God was a God of the poor is pretty clear. That Jesus also spoke in the voice of the prophets is also pretty clear. 
 As to Israel’s treatment of the Canaanites: we should be careful. This is something God allowed to happen for Israel only. It wasn’t a universal moral principle that anyone who wanted someone else’s land could take it. Sometimes as Christians we can forget the uniqueness of God’s love for Israel. In other words, as God’s elect, they have a different relationship to God than anyone else and God loves them differently. It is wrong for Gentiles to read that story and interpret it as permission for them to kill other peoples. If anything, Gentiles have more in common with the Canaanites than they do with Israel. In other words, the problem with Euro-american use of scripture was that they mistakenly thought they were God’s chosen people–they paid TOO LITTLE attention to scripture rather than too much. Again, God’s chosen people are not whoever decides or aspires to be God’s chosen people but whom Scripture says is God’s chosen people, which is Israel. 
 Also, in the book of Joshua we must also remember that the battle of Jericho was a rather strange battle–the whole community (it seems as though women and children were also present in this “battle ) walked around the walls of the city singing and after their seventh go-around, the walls collapsed. This should tell us that this is not a straight-forward story that grants permission to militarily mighty nations to use bombs and missiles to tear down other cities. 
 So you are right to point out that God does sometimes sanction violence, but, if we take the details of scripture seriously, it becomes pretty clear that God doesn’t sanction the type of violence that nations like the US or England or France does. 
 But again, thanks so much for your willingness to engage with me on this issue. Your thoughtfulness and passion are truly appreciated. 
 I always feel ambivalent, too, about arguing that we should look at things “scripturally.  I don’t mean this with any snark whatsoever, but I wonder how much of this concern to be “scriptural  is coming out of the fact that scripture was basically ignored by the Roman Catholic moral theology until Vatican II (or just before). So now the pendulum is coming back the other way maybe. We (the RCC) are kind of late to the bible party. I agree, Katie, that “the debate has been framed in such a way that we can only conceive of fidelity to scripture as a sort of fundamentalism,  by which we mean “in the style of conservative American evangelicals,  but I think it’s still important to be up front about the fact that when we appeal to the scriptures, we’re reading them with certain priorities already in mind. We’re not reading them “as they are  (since if we did, as Jennifer observes, we’d basically get nothing but a contradictory mess) but rather through a certain lens–in this case, we’re reading through the strand in the prophets that deals with the poor. 
 But then again maybe what’s needed in opposing “fundamentalist  readings of Scripture is something like a feminist “strategic essentialism,  except for the bible instead of for gender. Maybe we should keep saying that we need to have our ethics and understanding of God controlled by the scriptures if that’s the most effective way to advance the welfare of the poor and marginalized in the face of readings of scripture that would oppress them even further–even if that claim is (in my mind) kind of hermeneutically simplistic. 
 Sonja, Thanks for your comments–I totally agree that it is impossible to think that anyone is able to read scripture “as it is  and to claim to do so is to do something very dangerous. 
 I still think that, while we can never make scripture something neat and tidy or convenient, I do think that it is by paying more attention to ALL the details of scripture (and this would include a sort of contextualizing hermenuetic in which we take seriously the historical and social context in which a text was written not to relativize it or get to some sort of value behind the test but so that we can better understand what the author “meant  to say and how a given text would have “sounded  to its original audience). 
 But yes, Sonja, I totally agree–there is no “objective  reading of scripture…in fact, this belief is probably what gives rise to “literalism …the belief that anyone can just open up any page of the bible, extract any sentence, and know what it is saying. 
 Katie, Thanks for a thoughtful and challenging post. I think you are entirely right to be nervous about mixing/conflating patriotism and piety….But isn’t there another way to understand, interpret and pray “God Bless America.  What does the prayer that the USA come to be in right relationship with its neighbors? To a leader for human rights? to disarm and be a force for peace? Can it not be a plea for us to become a society of peacemakers? a society that protects the dignity of the poor instead of criminalizing poverty? would that not truly transform us into a blessed people? 
 That’s the things with prayers….we understand our need for assistance, for God, either our gratitude or pain…but I often think we understand little else by ourselves. That’s why so many have issues with not getting what they pray for – largely because they’ve decided everything and just asked god to “make it happen.  But if those millions who will proclaim god bless America, were to ask/plead God bless America and then listen/wait for what that might mean and were converted…would that not be a blessing? I’m all for separating patriotism from piety! And Katie offers a clear and honest list of the sins of our nation! And i do not think we can honestly ask for God’s blessing without facing those sins and that history – but I’m not convinced that we cannot ask faithfully, humbly and honestly (because if we did that – it wouldn’t be us/them, it couldn’t be). 
 Prayer is a tricky thing and it is very difficult to deal with the anger, judgement and self-serving attitude of those who think they KNOW – as if they have THE gnostic truth and sit in judgment of you. I’ve been on the receiving end of the “I’ll be praying for you  which is not a generous gesture but an arrogant judgment (for my decision to go to BC no less). I’m not certain what the form of that priest’s prayer took…but I’m fairly certain that his prayers as he intended them not answered…but that doesn’t mean “god help her  “show her the light  etc were useless…. 
 Hello, Meg, and thanks for your thoughts. I think you are absolutely right. We definitely should be praying for the United States but I think you are right that we have a pretty poor understanding of what that prayer should actually look like…you are further right that these sort of prayers are really a form of arrogance…we want God to ratify our decisions rather than receive the grace to submit to God’s…. 

 id="file23242589" filename="do-priests-bless-objects.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://raymundtamayo.com/theology/do-priests-bless-objects.html">
 Priests are ordained “that whatsoever they bless may be blessed, and whatsoever they consecrate shall be consecrated . The only case in which one inferior to a priest may bless is when the deacon blesses a candle on Holy Saturday, acting as a deputy and employing incense already blessed by the celebrant. 
 Can a priest bless a weapon? 
 Especially if they want god on their side. Originally Answered: This question just came to me. Can a priest bless a firearm? Yes they do all the time and not just guns. 
 How do you get an item blessed by a priest? 
 Call your local parish and ask the secretary what is the best route to take to get something blessed. Call your local parish or stop in at the Rectory and ask if you can see a priest. They will gladly bless them for you. 
 Can anyone bless an object? 
 Can Any Witch Bless An Object? Yes! Any layperson can bless an object with blessing spells. Since blessing spells are some of the simplest spells to do, it is really beginner-friendly, too. 
 Do priests still bless houses? 
 The blessing may be performed by an ordained priest or pastor, or by the owner of the house themselves. … Normally, the priest will walk from room to room, sprinkling each with holy water. As he walks, he may recite one or more passages from the holy gospel. 
 Can priests bless bullets? 
 PATH Member. Yes. You can have the guns and ammo blessed. 
 Can a priest bless a sword? 
 The old Roman Pontifical contains a blessing of weapons, but the text of the blessing assumes that they will be used in defence of the Church or of widows and orphans, and not simply as tools for hunting. … Get an Orthodox priest to bless them. 
 Can a priest bless your rosary? 
 Only a priest has the power to bless a rosary with these kinds of special spiritual help. However, you can bless your own rosary yourself with Holy water to bestow the beads with spiritual grace. … Place a few fingers into the holy water and sprinkle a few drops of holy water over your rosary. 
 Can a rosary be blessed twice? 
 Absolutely. Yes it would, it would allow the rosary to used to obtain a plenary indulgence on the Feasts of Sts. Peter and Paul. 
 Can a Bible be blessed? 
 The Bible is already blessed by God Himself. It is the Word of God. No man can add anything to it or improve it by doing anything. The Holy Spirit inspired and directed the many authors exactly what to write over a span of a few thousand years. 
 Can you bless something yourself? 
 One, you could get a priest to bless it. Two – and this is probably the easiest – you could sprinkle it with holy water or touch it to some other blessed object. The third option is to ask for a blessing it yourself. You just make the sign of the cross over it and ask God to bless it. 
 Can you say God bless you to a priest? 
 I too have heard it said that, strictly speaking, it is not right to say “God bless you  to a priest, though others may have different takes on this. Usually I don’t say anything; I just kiss his hand, and if he is offering a formal blessing, this completes the blessing and its reception without any awkwardness at all. 
 How do you bless someone with a word? 
 4 Verses to Bless Someone Today 
 Numbers 6:24–26. May the Lord Bless You. and protect you, … 
 Jeremiah 17:7–8. Blessed is the man who trusts in the Lord, And whose hope is the Lord. … 
 Psalm 20:1–5. May the Lord answer you in the day of trouble! May the name of the God of Jacob protect you! … 
 Psalms 1:1–3. Blessed is the man. 
 What are the 3 basic prayers? 
 Sign of the Cross. In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. … 
 Our Father. Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven. … 
 Can a Catholic deacon bless a house? 
 Deacons can offer most everything in the Book of Blessings: people, buildings, objects. They can bless families and individuals, homes, sick people, particular blessings for students, teachers, whatever…. they can bless holy water, rosaries, nativity scenes, advent wreaths, and offer Eucharistic Benediction. 
 What the Bible says about blessing your home? 
 Pray that God keeps your home safe: 
 Numbers 6:24-26 “The Lord bless you and keep you; the Lord make his face to shine upon you and be gracious to you; the Lord lift up his countenance upon you and give you peace.  
 1. Catholic Church 4,673,500 18.59 2. Southern Baptist Convention 3,722,194 14.80 3. Non-Denominational Christian 
 Religious practice promotes the well-being of individuals, families, and the community. … Religious worship 
 The most religious countries are Romania (1% non-believers) and Malta (2% non-believers). Which is 

 id="file23242735" filename="english-for-theology.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="http://sandrasembel.weebly.com/english-for-theology.html">
 Session 1. Introducing ourselves 
 Assignment: Make a 1 minute Video about your dialog with a partner and post it on to our facebook group. Deadline: Thursday, August 30, 2018, 15:00. 
 God bless you. 
 Session 2: The Story of Zaccheaus 
 Read the story and answer the questions (write the answers to the question on word.doc and upload to facebook group). 
 Retell the story orally 
 Upload your video recording of the story of zaccheaus to our facebook group. 
 Session 3: Telling Time 
 Numbers in English 
 Telling Time 1: Full hours 
 Telling time 2: ​To and Past 
 What time is it? It is ... 
 01:00 One o'clock 07:00 Seven o'clock 04:00 Four o'clock 08:00 Eight o'clock 05:00 Five o'clock 09:00 Nine o'clock 
 Telling Time 3: What time is it? Draw the line between the time on the left and the time in writing on the right. 
 ASSIGNMENT: Please click to download the assignment below. Answer the questions and submit your assignment to the assignment box below. 
 Submit your assignment here Deadline: Sunday, Sept 9, 2018, 23:59 
 10:50 Ten to 11 (10 menit menuju jam 11) 08:40 Twenty to nine (20 menit menuju jam 9) 
 11:10 Ten past eleven (10 menit lewat dari jam 11) 11:20 Twenty past eleven (20 menit lewat dari jam 11) 
 Session 5: The Story of the Prodigal Son 
 Read the story and answer the questions (write the answers to the question on word.doc and upload to facebook group). 
 Work in your group (6 students in one group) Retell the story orally in a mini play of 2-3 minutes. 
 Upload your video recording of the story of zaccheaus to our facebook group. 
 Session 6: This is my family 
 Study the learning materials below and do the activities. Then, upload the file with completed activities to our facebook group page. 
 Session 10: Talking about hobbies and interests 
 Click Session 10 on the right side. 
 Do all the activities in the worksheet. 
 Submit the worksheet by entering your name, file, email in the assignment box below. 
 Submit Session 10 worksheet here 
 Session 11: This is how I do it 
 Click Session 11 on the right side. 
 Do all the activities in the worksheet. 
 Submit the worksheet by entering your name, file, email in the assignment box below. 
 Submit Session 11 Worksheet below. 
 Session 12: This is my best friend 
 Click Session 12 on the right side. 
 Do all the activities in the worksheet. 
 Submit the worksheet by entering your name, file, email in the assignment box below. 
 Submit Session 12 worksheet below. 
 Session 13: Jesus healing paralytic man 
 Click the green button on the right side and find a story in powerpoint about Jesus Healing Paralytic man. 
 Summarize the story and retell the story in your own words. 

 id="file23242550" filename="exorcism-blessing-for-salt-and-water" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.romancatholicman.com/exorcism-blessing-for-salt-and-water/">
 Exorcism Blessing for Salt and Water 
 This past week, I was blessing water. It takes a lot longer and is more work, but I now only do the traditional blessing of water. For the first half of my priesthood, I did what most priests do … I would just make the sign of the cross over the water and that was it. Then I got “The Roman Ritual  and I was shocked by the complete blessing of water including exorcisms and adding exorcised salt to the holy water. 
 Rite from the Roman Ritual 
 (Priest vests in surplice and purple stole) 
 P: Our help is in the name of the Lord. R: Who made heaven and earth. 
 Exorcism and Blessing of Salt (necessary for Exorcism of Water) 
 P: O salt, creature of God, I exorcise you by the living (+) God, by the true (+) God, by the holy (+) God, by the God who ordered you to be poured into the water by Elisha the prophet, so that its life-giving powers might be restored. I exorcise you so that you may become a means of salvation for believers, that you may bring health of soul and body to all who make use of you, and that you may put to flight and drive away from the places where you are sprinkled; every apparition, villainy, turn of devilish deceit, and every unclean spirit; adjured by him who will come to judge the living and the dead and the world by fire. 
 R: Amen. 
 P: Let us pray. Almighty and everlasting God, we humbly implore you, in your immeasurable kindness and love, to bless (+) this salt which you created and gave to the use of mankind, so that it may become a source of health for the minds and bodies of all who make use of it. May it rid whatever it touches or sprinkles of all uncleanness, and protect it from every assault of evil spirits. Through Christ our Lord. 
 R: Amen. 
 Exorcism and Blessing of Water 
 P: O water, creature of God, I exorcise you in the name of God the Father (+) Almighty, and in the name of Jesus (+) Christ His Son, our Lord, and in the power of the Holy (+) Spirit. I exorcise you so that you may put to flight all the power of the enemy, and be able to root out and supplant that enemy with his apostate angels, through the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, who will come to judge the living and the dead and the world by fire. 
 R: Amen. 
 P: Let us pray. O God, for the salvation of mankind, you built your greatest mysteries on this substance, water. In your kindness, hear our prayers and pour down the power of your blessing (+) into this element, made ready for many kinds of purifications. May this, your creature, become an agent of divine grace in the service of your mysteries, to drive away evil spirits and dispel sickness, so that everything in the homes and other buildings of the faithful that is sprinkled with this water, may be rid of all uncleanness and freed from every harm. Let no breath of infection and no disease-bearing air remain in these places. May the wiles of the lurking enemy prove of no avail. Let whatever might menace the safety and peace of those who live here be put to flight by the sprinkling of this water, so that the health obtained by calling upon your holy name, may be made secure against all attack. Through Christ our Lord. 
 R: Amen. 
 (Priest pours exorcised salt into the water, in the form of a cross) 
 P: May a mixture of salt and water now be made, in the name of the Father, and of the (+) Son, and of the Holy Spirit. 
 R: Amen. 
 P: The Lord be with you. R: And with your spirit. 
 P: Let us pray. O God, Creator unconquerable, invincible King, Victor ever-glorious, you hold in check the forces bent on dominating us. You overcome the cruelty of the raging enemy, and in your power you beat down the wicked foe. Humbly and fearfully do we pray to you, O Lord, and we ask you to look with favor on this salt and water which you created. Shine on it with the light of your kindness. Sanctify it by the dew of your love, so that, through the invocation of your holy name, wherever this water and salt is sprinkled, it may turn aside every attack of the unclean spirit, and dispel the terrors of the poisonous serpent. And wherever we may be, make the Holy Spirit present to us, who now implore your mercy. Through Christ our Lord. 

 id="file23242638" filename="extraordinary-form-book-of-blessings-4549" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.ewtn.com/catholicism/library/extraordinary-form-book-of-blessings-4549">
 Extraordinary Form; Book of Blessings 
 Author: Father Edward McNamara 
 A ZENIT DAILY DISPATCH 
 Extraordinary Form; Book of Blessings 
 ROME, 2 NOV. 2010 (ZENIT) Answered by Legionary of Christ Father Edward McNamara, professor of liturgy at the Regina Apostolorum university. 
 Q: In the celebration of the extraordinary form of the Latin-rite Mass, do prescriptions and indults given for the ordinary form apply, such as those in the United States permitting the lay faithful to receive Communion in the hand and expressing a preference for the laity to stand while receiving Communion? Another question: In 1989 the Book of Blessings was published in the U.S. The title page indicates that it is "The Roman Ritual" "Revised by Decree of the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council and Published by Authority of Pope John Paul II." It contains a decree from the U.S. bishops' conference that includes this statement: "From 3 December 1989, the First Sunday of Advent, the use of the Book of Blessings is mandatory in the dioceses of the United States of America. From that day forward no other English version may be used." Does this mean that the use of the "old" Roman Ritual — for example, the 1964 version based on the 1952 editio typica — is now forbidden? I know priests who use the old Roman Ritual. It certainly appears that some of the prayers in it are more robust, theologically elevated, and spiritually richer than their counterparts in the Book of Blessings. — M.R., Corcoran, Minnesota 
 A: Regarding the first question there is some debate among canonists. From what I have been able to gauge, the majority believe that since Summorum Pontificum approved the liturgical books according to the rubrics of 1962, then later concessions based on the new liturgical books do not apply to them. 
 The most authoritative commentary is from now Cardinal-designate Raymond Burke, prefect of the Supreme Court of the Apostolic Signature. The original text was published in German as the preface to a book on Summorum Pontificum. The translation was provided by the New Liturgical Movement website: 
 "In the second chapter of his commentary, Weishaupt [Author of the Book in German] answers a number of practical issues that arise regarding the implementation of Summorum Pontificum and result from recent changes to the discipline of the celebration of the sacraments, such as e.g. those regarding female altar servers or lay people who perform the ministry of lectors or extraordinary ministers of Holy Communion. To answer these questions, the commentary correctly applies two general canonical principles. 
 "The first principle requires that liturgical norms, which were in force in 1962, are to be diligently observed for the celebration of the Extraordinary Form of the Roman Rite, for these norms protect the integrity of the Roman rite as contained in the Missal of Blessed John XXIII. The second principle states that the subsequent liturgical discipline is only to be introduced in the Extraordinary Form, if this discipline affects a right of the faithful, which follows directly from the sacrament of baptism and serves the eternal salvation of their souls. 
 "The application of these two principles to the cases mentioned leads to the conclusion that neither the service at the altar by persons of the female sex nor the exercise of the lay ministries of lector or extraordinary minister of Holy Communion belong to the basic rights of the baptized. Therefore, these recent developments, out of respect for the integrity of the liturgical discipline as contained in the Missale Romanum of 1962, are not to be introduced into the Extraordinary Form of the Roman rite. The commentary presents here in an impressive manner that the mutual enrichment of both forms of the Roman rite is only possible if discipline peculiar to each of the two forms is accordingly carefully observed." 
 Another recent document is a supposed form letter in German from the Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei. The letter, dated June 21, 2010, contains the letterhead and seal of the pontifical commission but lacks a signature and protocol number. If it is genuine, then it is probably a prepared reply to a question presumably frequently put to an overworked office and merely corroborates the reasoning presented above, to wit: "In reference to your letter of 15 June, this papal commission would like to point out that the celebration of Holy Mass in the extraordinary form envisages the reception of Holy Communion while kneeling, as the Holy Host is laid directly on the tongue of the communicant. There is no provision for the distribution of Holy Communion on the hand in this form of the Holy Mass." 
 Regarding the Book of Blessings, the situation is somewhat more confused. Most commentators seem to favor the possibility of using the 1964 English translation but do not always present airtight canonical arguments. The promulgation of Summorum Pontificum has also modified the situation. In the Introduction to the Book of Blessings, Chapter V, No. 39, deals with: Adaptations Belonging to the Conferences of Bishops. This chapter grants wide leeway to the bishops with respect to blessings, including adding new ones. With respect to the former ritual, No. 39c says that the conference has the faculty "to retain or to adapt blessings belonging to particular rituals or those of the former Roman Ritual that are still in use, as long as such blessings are compatible with the tenor of the Constitution on the Liturgy, with the principles set out in this General Introduction and with contemporary needs." 
 Since the bishops had the faculty to incorporate blessings from the older ritual into the new book, I believe that it was their intention that only those formulas eventually incorporated into the new book were to be used in the United States. 
 The publication of Summorum Pontificum has probably changed that situation. I believe that any priest may use the Latin blessings of the Roman Pontifical. It is true that the Blessings Book is not specifically mentioned in Pope Benedict's motu proprio, but it was listed in an information sheet issued by the Vatican Press Office as among the books required for celebrating the extraordinary form. It also follows logically that if the papal document permitted the celebration of the sacraments, it would naturally permit the sacramentals. Some sacramentals, such as the blessing of water and salt, are intimately linked to the sacramental celebrations themselves. 
 I also am of the opinion that it is possible to use the approved 1964 translation of the 1952 Book of Blessings. Summorum Pontificum permits the use of approved translations of the vernacular readings at Mass, and this certainly includes translations approved after 1962. The older Book of Blessings was also still in force in Latin until 1984 and in English until the present volume was published. 
 This opens up an interesting question as to whether the papal initiative also permits the use of translations of the extraordinary form officially approved before the conciliar reform. Bilingual rites for some sacraments and sacramentals were already approved by Popes Pius XII and John XXIII and were in use before the Second Vatican Council. Lacking any definitive statement from the Holy See, I am unable to give an answer. But the question is intriguing. 
 Some authors offer other arguments that might permit a partial use of the 1964 translation. Some say that "liturgical blessings" must be according to the new rite while "non-liturgical blessings," which are more flexible, may use the older texts. 
 I am not convinced of this distinction; it must be remembered that the Church holds that all the rites contained in the Book of Blessings are liturgical acts, including those imparted by laity. Perhaps a better distinction would be between constitutive and invocative blessings. A constitutive blessing is one in which the person or object is separated from normal use and constituted as a sacred person or object. These blessings are reserved to an ordained minister: to a bishop (blessing of an abbot, consecration of a Church) or to a priest (blessing of a chalice). The blessing of devotional objects such as rosaries, medals and small crosses can be done by priest or deacon. An invocative blessing is one that implores God's favor on the person or object blessed but does not change their nature nor reserve them for a sacred function. These are the vast majority of blessings. 
 Even if there is no general permission for the use of the1964 translation, the fact that the present Book of Blessings offers a wide degree of flexibility to the celebrant would allow for the use of some prayers from the older ritual, especially with respect to invocative blessings and the simpler constitutive blessings. This would not be possible for the more important constitutive blessings such as those reserved to the bishop or the blessings of objects for the liturgy or public veneration. Quite a number of ministers have expressed disappointment with the new Book of Blessings. The decree of approval states the reason for the new book: "In ordering the reform of sacramentals, Vatican Council II decreed that in their celebration special attention should be given to the full, conscious, and active participation of the faithful and that any elements should be eliminated that in the course of time had obscured the true nature and purpose of sacramentals ..." 
 The complaints about the result do not stem so much from the introduction of community blessings, of readings from Scripture, and of general intercessions. Rather, the complaints relate to the quality of the prayers of blessings themselves which often seem to lack a specific moment in which the person or object is clearly blessed or when to make the sign of the cross as is traditional in blessings. 
 In order to clarify the latter point the Congregation for Divine Worship issued a statement that the sign of the cross is made when the word "bless" is used, or, if this word is lacking, at the end of the prayer. 
 * * * 
 Extraordinary Form; Book of Blessings [11-16-2010] 
 After our reply on the extraordinary form and the Book of Blessings (see Nov. 2), some readers asked for further clarifications. 
 An Alabama reader asked: "Can a permanent deacon impart blessing on people or articles as the priest or bishop does by making the sign of the cross over them? Can he also bless water apart from baptismal water?" 
 A deacon, whether permanent or transitory, may carry out all those blessings not specifically reserved to a bishop or priest in the Book of Blessings. The rites open to the deacon include most blessings of people, devotional objects and also holy water. 
 Although the deacon may impart these blessings, he should usually defer to a priest if one is present and available. Likewise, blessings during Mass are always done by the priest. 
 A Mississippi reader made a request regarding Summorum Pontificum: "The extraordinary form of the Mass is celebrated weekly at a church in New Orleans. When Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament follows Mass, the priestly blessing and the last Gospel are eliminated from the Mass. Is this procedure correct?" 
 While I am no expert on all the intricacies of the extraordinary form, classical liturgical guides such as Fortescue-O'Connell-Reid in English and Trimelloni in Italian both describe the exposition of the Blessed Sacrament after Mass or before a procession as following the Fourth Gospel. Trimelloni states that even in those rare cases when Mass was allowed before the Blessed Sacrament exposed, the priest blessed the people as usual and not with the Blessed Sacrament (No. 437, A4). 
 It would appear therefore that the practice in this parish is incorrect with respect to the rubrics of the extraordinary form. 
 ZENIT International News Agency Via della Stazione di Ottavia, 95 00165 Rome, Italy www.zenit.org 
 To subscribe http://www.zenit.org/english/subscribe.html or email: english-request@zenit.org with SUBSCRIBE in the "subject" field 
 Provided Courtesy of: Eternal Word Television Network 5817 Old Leeds Road Irondale, AL 35210 www.ewtn.com 
 HOME - EWTNews - FAITH - TELEVISION - RADIO - LIBRARY - MULTIMEDIA WHAT'S NEW - GENERAL - RELIGIOUS CATALOGUE - PILGRIMAGES - ESPAÑOL 

 id="file23242582" filename="faith-sod-bishop-blesses-plough-ahead-start-farming-year" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2022/01/09/faith-sod-bishop-blesses-plough-ahead-start-farming-year/">
 Faith in sod: Bishop blesses plough ahead of start of farming year 
 Bishop of Chichester conducts traditional blessing on Plough Sunday, as farmers hope for a fertile year in the fields 
 A bishop blessed the plough of a local farmer in south-east England on Sunday as part of a tradition to mark the start of the farming year. 
 The Right Reverend Dr Martin Warner, Bishop of Chichester, blessed the machinery of Jonathon Bental in the parish of Chidham, East Sussex. 
 Plough Sunday is a traditional English celebration where parishioners and members of the agricultural community come together to mark the start of the agricultural year, after the fields have been left fallow for several months. 
 The celebration usually involves bringing a plough to church to receive a blessing, but it is also common for local farmers to attend services with their tractors. The celebrations can also be accompanied by other traditions, including Morris Dancing. 
 The celebration - which is held on the first Sunday after Epiphany, typically between Jan 7 and 13 - goes back to Victorian times, but has its roots in much older worship. 
 In the Middle Ages, ploughs were sometimes kept in the parish church, and some churches kept a 'plough-light' - a candle that burned over the plough throughout the winter. 
 In days when work was scarce, parishioners would look forward to the time of sowing with the promise of a harvest to come. 
 Separately, the annual blessing of the Thames took place on London Bridge on Sunday, during which a wooden crucifix was thrown into the river. 
 The parishes of Southwark Cathedral and St Magnus the Martyr met in the middle of the bridge and held a short religious service. 
 The custom was only established during the twenty-first century, but it harks back to the ancient ceremony in the Orthodox church of throwing a cross into the waters on the Sunday after Epiphany. 
 We've noticed you're adblocking. 
 We rely on advertising to help fund our award-winning journalism. 
 We urge you to turn off your ad blocker for The Telegraph website so that you can continue to access our quality content in the future. 

 id="file23242752" filename="from-left-to-right-or-from-right-to-left-the-sign-of-the-cross" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.praytellblog.com/index.php/2017/09/13/from-left-to-right-or-from-right-to-left-the-sign-of-the-cross/">
 From Left to Right or from Right to Left? The Sign of the Cross 
 Roman Catholics make the sign of the cross in the following order: The right hand moves from top (forehead) to bottom (chest) and then from left (left shoulder) to right (right shoulder). Most Eastern Christians do it in a different order: From top to bottom and then from right to left. 
 There are several theological interpretations of that difference. The biblical meaning of “the left side  is different from “the right side . In a simplified manner we could say that in the biblical world-view the right side is good, noble, and heavenly, while the left is bad, low, and earthly. (I do not need to tell you that this approach can still be found in the English word “right .) Against this background we can easily imagine a large symbolic difference depending on whether you move from left or right (symbol of ascension) or from right to left (symbol of incarnation). 
 But there is also a more historical approach. How did the difference between the Eastern and the Western practice emerge? 
 As far as I know, bishops (and priests) in the Roman Empire have always made the sign of the cross as a blessing over the people by writing the sign of the cross in the air. After moving from top to bottom they move from left to right. Why? Because this is the natural way of writing. Greek and Latin words – these two languages have always been dominant in the Roman Empire – are written from left to right. 
 What do the people do when they are blessed in that way? They do what is natural to them: They mirror the sign. So they move from right to left (sic!). Check it out with a little child: When you stand vis-à-vis to a kid and try to demonstrate the sign of the cross, the kid will mirror your movements. If you move from left to right, the kid will move from right to left. – That is why I know a lady who taught her grandchildren the sign of the cross sitting next to them, not vis-à-vis. 
 In this context, the movement from left to right is only done by those who write the sign into the air as a blessing over others. In all other cases the movement goes from right to left – even in private prayer: I do not bless myself, I am being blessed. 
 Around 1190 a Roman deacon – who later became Pope Innocence III – witnessed that some people in Rome have started to make the sign over their bodies in the opposite direction: from left to right. Since then, moving from the left shoulder to the right shoulder has become the typical Western way. 
 But why did these people start to change the direction? They started to reflect too much. “Look, the bishop moves his hand from left to right, so we should do the same!  Or, following another theory that refers to the different order of words in the Greek and Latin clause for “Holy Spirit : “Look, when the Greek say ‘holy’ they touch the right shoulder, so we should do the same!  Anyway: The natural mirror effect was replaced by something on a higher level of reflection. 
 Nowadays the movement during a Roman Catholic blessing is always in a way distorted. This gets very obvious when a priest stands close to you and blesses you individually. While he writes the cross in the air, you criss-cross his movement with your own hand. In no way is this a natural gestural communication. Instead of intuitively mirroring the sign that is written over us, we got used to imitate the blessing gesture on our own bodies. 
 Someone in the 12th century started to change the direction of the movement. My personal plan is to be “someone in the 21st century  who starts to reverse that development. I always make the sign of the cross from right to left. When a bishop or priest makes the blessing sign from left to right, it feels natural to mirror that sign by moving from right to left. During this movement my arm goes from a cramped position (right fingers on the right shoulder) to an open and wide position (right fingers on the left shoulder) – maybe a nice symbol for spiritual development! 
 Is anyone going to join me? (But please do not ask me what you should do when you are a lefty.) 
 22 comments 
 Hide Comments 
 Not me. I would strongly oppose messing with centuries of lay practice in that regard, as with attempts to get English-speaking Catholic laity to significantly change the Our Father, which mercifully have failed miserably (my current pastor tries to overtalk the congregation in this regard, which is a rather unprogressive approach….). This is trying to fix something that isn’t *broken*, and I question the wisdom of putting effort into it. 
 Btw, direction is not the only important difference between East and West. There’s also finger formation and whether the second gesture goes to the lower torso rather than center (and differences within the East on those matters, too). 
 I am Eastern Orthodox and we have never changed the way in which we make the Sign of the cross: forehead to stomach, right to left. This makes a rough Greek equal armed cross, In the West when a person crosses themselves the forehead, chest, the left to right direction reverses the original order. Karl Liam Sur is correct also in the finger formation in the Eastern Orthodoxy being different. We use the thumb, forefinger, and middle finger held together in remembrance of the Holy Trinity (Old Believers/Old Rite Orthodox use just the forefinger and middle finger for the two natures of Christ, human and divine), whereas the Western is more of an open hand. 
 I think KLS is right in that we shouldn’t “mess with  lay practice, if “messing with  means legislation or coercion, but I sense that LL’s original point is aiming more toward providing a discreet and voluntary example, rather than a showy and hyper-didactic one. 
 I should add to the symbolism that, for those of us attached to the preconciliar form of the Latin Rite, the Eastern (and older Western) direction of right-to-left also mirrors the transition of the Missal from Epistle to Gospel side, and symbolizes how the Gospel came first to the Jews (right), then to the Gentiles/all nations (left). 
 Let me put it this way: like Karl Liam Saur, I wouldn’t get too hung up on it either, nor do I think that the modern Latin practice is “broken,  but I personally would not mind seeing an organic, bottom-up transition to the older form, which we could share with our Orthodox brethren. (No, I’m not going to get into the whole three- vs. two-finger Old Believer schism…) 
 I have made the sign of the cross on my body from right to left for most of my adult life. I picked it up from the Ukrainians, and it felt more natural, so I stayed with it. Neither direction, nor finger formation, has any implicit significance – all interpretations on such emerge after the practice, and interpretations can be generated to support anything. I am a Roman rite priest of 30 years. Few of the people who actually notice it have ever said anything, and the only person to ever get cross was an English monk. When before little children who are still learning the practice they do mirror me, and thus make the sign of the cross left to right; when blessing them they mirror the sign being made and so go right to left. 
 Through the centuries following the Popes has many times led to a weakening of the faith and a divergence with Eastern Christianity. Whether the sign of the cross, the changing of the Nicene creed, or the watering down to an almost Protestant form of the Catholic mass. Not looking for a fight just offering for sobre thought. 
 It seems to me the beginning of this article made sense then you lost me. If you’re blessing someone, hand facing out to some degree and go left to right, ascension. You’re blessing them to ascend to Heaven. If you’re blessing yourself after prayer, right to left, inviting the holy spirit in. Incarnation. It just so happens doing it this way if the priest or father is facing the individual, he goes left to right to give blessing, the person goes right to left to bless themselves and you get the mirroring effect as well. I’ll be honest, I don’t follow a specific religion soley, but this makes the most sense to me. 
 Right to left was first. It is the orthodox way, no distortion. To be on the right hand if God. Many things changed after the schism. 
 I believe, that it is the right way, from left to right, when you sign yourself. It seems to me that I have done that from childhood. It feels more natural that way, to bring your right had back to the center to join with the other hand.especially if you are right handed, how does a left hander feel about that, or do they use their right hand, to make the sign. 
 I was part of the Western Church and I always crossed myself with three fingers and found, when becoming Orthodox, the right to left motion was more natural–don’t ask me why, because I’m right handed, but for me, it just feels natural. 
 Just looking at the history of the sign of the cross this should not even be up for debate it’s been universally (or Catholically if you prefer) done from right to left by the early church and continued to this day by the Eastern church. The 2 finger gesture is the bigger deal IMO and the oldest form also used by the early church (evidenced in the oldest icons). The index and middle fingers pointing upward with the middle slightly bent symbolize the Christ being fully man and fully God with the thumb, ring, and pinky fingers all adjoined symbolizing the Trinity. 
 Of course there is no salvation in the way you cross yourself after all Jesus said he desires mercy not sacrifice, however, I feel it is important to try and keep the tradition handed down for us from the saints as much as possible. That’s just my opinion. 
 Is this perhaps the origin of the English less than affectionate expression labelling Roman Catholics as “left handers ? 
 To be the right way we would have to know how Jesus was nailed to the cross was the first nail on the right hand to the left-hand or from the left-hand to the right I feel either way is Right . It acknowledges that Jesus was nailed to the cross. hallelujah 
 I’m left handed and use left hand to my right side first and then to my left, and I am R Catholic… 
 when in italy, multiple times now people have stopped in the middle of the street and done the sign of the cross at me..can anyone tell me what this means?? 
 To me as a simple Man . To me I believe head to chest , Right to left . I was always told that the son ,Jesus was seated at the right hand of God . 
 Blessed Holy Thursday to all bloggers. The comments that struck me most were about ‘ascension'(L-R) and ‘incarnation'(R-L). It seems perhaps more than a compromise then, to teach that we begin prayer with the sign of the cross R-L (Incarnation-inviting the Holy Spirit to form His thoughts & Will in us) and then teach that afterwards our prayers have been sent and make the sign of the cross L-R(Ascension). Like consecrated bookends to our oblations. I’m much happier to inform catechumens than to tell them one way is right vs. wrong or worst yet, east vs. west. It’s both and! God Bless You, Rev. Youroukos! Please pray for me. 
 I was told that the sign of the cross meant, the father means “brain  , the son means,the “heart  and the holy spirit means “you  is this true ?? 
 My father, a Ukrainian, told me that we cross right to left just as Micheal Weldon states   Jesus was seated at the right hand of God. I have always crossed right to left as a child and still as an adult. 
 I think only Latin and Syro-Antiochene traditions changed the first millennium practice of sign of the cross “from right to left  to “left to right.  Syro Malabarians, a latinized tradition also changed it due to the influence of the Latin Church (but they corrected it recently in their liturgical texts) … Other than the above historical reason there seems to be another reason, may be theological/symbolic reason: When we say “in the name of the Father  we move our hand from top to bottom, and when we say “and of the Son  we are moving our hand from bottom to right side – in the biblical understanding Son is at the right hand of the Father (though I don’t know God has any side?). Sign of the cross itself is a Trinitarian formula. 
 The teachings and the comments are all good. The sign of the cross has been mentioned or seen in the scriptures in many cases. Like Moses fighting the Amalekites and when his hands are raised perhaps forming a sign of the cross, the Israelites won the battle. The same Moses was told to make a bronze serpent and raise it on a tree so that whoever looked at it was healed. Jesus dying on the cross again shows the cross as a big sign of victory. For me therefore the “sign of the cross   has the greater meaning. It is a weapon to fight our enemy the “devil  . A prayer,   by the sign of the cross, deliver us from our enemies, you who is Our God, in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy spirit. Amen  We say this prayer as we touch our forehead, the lips and the chest or belly and finally make the big cross that is head, chest or belly and the shoulders. 
 Is it important to cross ourselves a particular way? In a word, YES. We do not have the authority to choose willy-nilly what parts of the Christina Tradition we want to follow. Our fathers, and countless saints crossed themselves from right to left. Ancient icons show Christ or bishops beginning a blessing from right to left. the right side is referred to in a preferential way many times in scripture and our sacred hymns What should we want to change? The Romans changed it officially in ROME not all Catholicism lol in the 15th century. 

 id="file23242573" filename="god-blesses-whomever-he-wants-to-bless.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="http://www.thedailydevotional.org/2019/08/god-blesses-whomever-he-wants-to-bless.html">
 A godly and biblically-based devotional to help people with their faith and confidence; to encourage, educate, and inform. Come everyday for inspiration. Almost everybody is going through something and you can get through it with Jesus. I am a witness to that fact. Never give up on the great blessings God already has lined up for you. Jeremiah 29:11 says, 'He knows the plans He has for you, plans to prosper you and not to harm you, plans to give you hope and a future.' 
 Search 
 Search This Blog 
 God blesses whomever he wants to bless, whenever he wants to bless them 
 Daily Devotional Podcast. Follow along with blog post. 
 When I was going through a dark time -- when I had nothing -- there was a certain person who helped me sometimes. She helped me whenever she basically felt like it, but she did help, and for that I'm appreciative. But, something interesting happened after I started growing out of my despair. Something interesting started happening when I no longer needed her for anything. And something interesting happened even though I remained kind and grateful towards. The interesting thing that happened was that she started hating on me. She started treating me differently. At first I was really bothered by it, because I thought she and her husband were nice people I wanted in my life. I liked that they had a sense of compassion and were interested in helping people who were down and low. That really appealed to me, because I was raised that way; my mother was raised that way; her mother was raised that way, and it goes back to as far back as perhaps we are not even aware of. The bottom line is that I was really hurt and confused about why a person would be there to help another person to get on their feet and when the person got on their feet, there would be no happiness or joy for the person. In fact, it was just the opposite. It was jealously, bitterness and resentment. One day I realized that no matter what you do or don't do, there will be some people who just will not celebrate your accomplishments, who want you to remain in dark places, and will help you as long as you don't get too big or start passing them. That's just a fact of life that I cannot concern myself with and don't you either. In Acts 10:34, "Peter fairly exploded with his good news: “It’s God’s own truth, nothing could be plainer: God plays no favorites! It makes no difference who you are or where you’re from—if you want God and are ready to do as he says, the door is open." In other words, God will bless who He wants when He wants, because He is no respecter of persons. That's it. 
 Comments 
 Post a Comment 
 Popular posts from this blog 
 Daily Devotional Podcast. Follow along with blog post. How are you feeling today? What kind of head space have you been in lately? I ask, because I'm just wondering if anybody feels like me -- free like me. Free as an eagle. Free as can be. That's right, out with doing business the old stale way and in with a fresh new operation. It's a shifting happening in the atmosphere of Sharon's life and I'm moving on to the big and awesome things God has for me. What do you say for yourself? What are you speaking over your life? What it is for you? For me, I am no longer afraid to go out in the deep end. I am no longer afraid to fly higher, I am no longer concerned about what I have or do not have, and I am no longer concerned about what anybody thinks or says. Who the heck cares anymore? I don't. Because God tells me he doesn't give me a spirit of fear or timidity ( 2 Timothy 1 :7) , but He gives me a spirit of love, confidence, power, self-control, and 
 Click to listen to current podcast episode. “Never Giving Up  are power-words — strong affirmations that give us momentum and movement. That’s what’s up. We can do so much more in our lives when we have momentum and movement. It’s about standing, literally and not sitting or laying around feeling sorry for ourselves. I used to do that once upon a time and that sorrowful thinking is for the birds. We don’t have to be down. We can get up and get going even if we start small. In fact, I love starting small, because it helps set a firm foundation of habits and routines. Momentum and movement will help us get and maintain a position of strength to do what God says we can do. CLICK to get my latest ebook collection that will help you get MOVING regarding the things you want in your life. 

 id="file23242666" filename="god-bless-us-everyone" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.urbanatheologicalseminary.org/god-bless-us-everyone/">
 “God Bless Us Everyone  
 written by Brent Dickman, Urbana Seminary Alum and Adjunct Professor 
 “A merry Christmas, uncle! God save you!  cried a cheerful voice. It was the voice of Scrooge’s nephew, who came upon him so quickly that this was the first intimation he had of his approach. 
 “Bah!  said Scrooge, “Humbug!  
 He had so heated himself with rapid walking in the fog and frost, this nephew of Scrooge’s, that he was all in a glow; his face was ruddy and handsome; his eyes sparkled, and his breath smoked again. 
 “Christmas a humbug, uncle!  said Scrooge’s nephew. “You don’t mean that, I am sure.  
 “I do,  said Scrooge. “Merry Christmas! What right have you to be merry? What reason have you to be merry? You’re poor enough.  
 “Come, then,  returned the nephew gaily. “What right have you to be dismal? What reason have you to be morose? You’re rich enough.  
 Scrooge having no better answer ready on the spur of the moment, said “Bah!  again; and followed it up with “Humbug.  
 “Don’t be cross, uncle!  said the nephew. 
 “What else can I be,  returned the uncle, “when I live in such a world of fools as this? Merry Christmas! Out upon merry Christmas! What’s Christmas time to you but a time for paying bills without money; a time for finding yourself a year older, but not an hour richer; a time for balancing your books and having every item in ‘em through a round dozen of months presented dead against you? If I could work my will,  said Scrooge indignantly, “every idiot who goes about with ‘Merry Christmas’ on his lips, should be boiled with his own pudding, and buried with a stake of holly through his heart. He should!  
 Truth be told, I imagine that sometimes we all feel a little bit like ol’ Ebeneezer. Perhaps we’ve heard that pop-rendition of a certain Christmas song one too many times on the radio. We tire of all the shopping, consumerism, and crowds. Sometimes all the festivity begins to wear on us. Or maybe it’s all the work that finds its way into December, from final exams to year-end tasks. We’ll struggle against the humbug-spirit. We’ll fight to find some good Christmas cheer – a good deed for a stranger, a dollar for the Salvation Army, our favorite movie, whether Linus or an elf named Buddy, little Kevin or Tiny Tim, a Grinch or a Griswold, or something else. And of course through it all, we stare face to face with the bigger question. What does it all have to do with Christ in the manger anyway? 
 This question, what does the celebration of Christmas have to do with the Nativity, was in some way, I think, upon the mind of Charles Dickens as he wrote A Christmas Carol. Dickens was a lifelong Christian and his work is not as secular as is often supposed. I have read scholars assert that A Christmas Carol must surely be secular, as it contains no scenes at church, no religious expounding on shepherds or magi, no pontifications on Incarnation or Blessed Virginity. But that, I think, misunderstands Dickens’s intention. His readers knew the story of Christ’s birth. They were looking, like us, for how it applied to their life and how it connected with the “spirit  of every present Christmas. 
 Like other great Christian writers, Dickens is not a theologian per say, but his work is laced with matters relevant to theology, especially to questions of ethics or to theological aesthetics (specifically in the latter’s concern for what might enable us to choose and live the moral Christian life). Dickens didn’t write religious fiction. To paraphrase G.K. Chesterton on the matter, they are prayers, not sermons – prayers offered through his literary imagination on behalf of our imagination (Chesterton 1906, 96). 
 Imagination is more than make-believe or daydreaming. It guides what thoughts and feelings come to mind as we go about our day. In this way our imagination influences, consciously and unconsciously, the way we live our lives. How do we conceive of, perceive, and understand the significance of what goes on in and around our lives, in this case, of all the Christmas merriment? 
 In A Christmas Carol, Dickens addresses his literary prayer on behalf of our Christmas imagination. Dickens’s hope is to reveal how the celebration of Christmas might be a means toward a Christian end. I venture to say that we are familiar enough with the tale to identify that end – the It’s-A-Wonderful-Life-related message of the worth of love of neighbor as oneself. It is the idea of Christian charity. “Religion that God our Father accepts as pure and faultless,  says James, “is this: to look after orphans and widows in their distress.  And we might imagine him adding, “to care for Tiny Tim.  We are familiar with the end, but what of the means? 
 Scrooge’s transformation is wrought by the ministrations of the Spirits of Christmas. These ghosts awaken memories and reveal moments that change the way he perceives the world. They work upon his imagination so that his heart might be redeemed. Scrooge’s journey with the Ghost of Christmas Past, of Scrooge’s Christmas Past, to be precise, awakens him to something once lost. Dickens tells us as much, as Scrooge gazes upon the first of his many visions – the countryside of his boyhood home: 
 “The Spirit gazed upon [Scrooge] mildly. Its gentle touch [upon his heart], though it had been light and instantaneous, appeared still present to the old man’s sense of feeling. He was conscious of a thousand odours floating in the air, each one connected with a thousand thoughts, and hopes, and joys, and cares long, long forgotten.  
 As Scrooge visits memories of yesteryear, like the well-known Christmas celebration at Fezziwig’s, he re-imagines those moments of joy and happiness long forgotten. These moments are the so-called secular festivities of the Christmas season. Their significance is a motif recurring often through many of Dickens’s works surrounding Christmas. In The Pickwick Papers, finished just six years prior to Carol, Dickens makes an analogy between the festivities of Christmas with those of a wedding. For both, it is the celebration of the matter that makes clear the meaning. Celebrants are filled with joy and their hearts are opened to see clearly the peace and beauty of lives lived together in relationship, community, friendship, and love. Yet while a particular wedding might fill the hearts of only some with joy, Christmas festivities might do so for many more (Walder 1981, 27-28). The assertion made is a theological one: joy matters. 
 Joy matters because it makes room in the heart for hope. And if hope for the future is the beauty of a wedding, how much more so it is for Christmas! The ministry of the Ghost of Christmas Present is like the prayer offered by Paul to the Romans: “May the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace as you trust in him, so that you may overflow with hope by the power of the Holy Spirit  (Rm 15.13). This ministry, this prayer, is at its most evident and pronounced in dialogue not often depicted in adaptions for the screen. If we recognized that there are no scenes at church services in A Christmas Carol, this does not mean that its worshipful intent, its theological thrust, is not still felt. We find Bob Cratchit and Tiny Tim not at church, but returning from church. And we hear not from a vicar, but a feeble boy, ready to teach Scrooge how to enter the Kingdom. The lesson is for us, the reader, too: 
 “And how did little Tim behave?  asked Mrs. Cratchit…. 
 “As good as gold,  said Bob, “and better. Somehow, he gets thoughtful, sitting by himself so much, and thinks the strangest things you ever heard. He told me, coming home, that he hoped the people saw him in the church, because he was a cripple, and it might be pleasant to them to remember upon Christmas-day Who made lame beggars walk and blind men see.  
 Bob’s voice was tremulous when he told them this, and trembled more when he said that Tiny Tim was growing strong and hearty.  
 Scrooge knew Him of whom Tiny Tim spoke. He just hadn’t thought of Him for a while, not in this way. He came to understand. A father’s toast becomes a son’s prayer, and leads Scrooge to repentance, to imagine life in a different way. We know the scene: 
 Then all the Cratchit family drew round the hearth in what Bob Cratchit called a circle, meaning half a one; and at Bob Cratchit’s elbow stood the family display of glass. Two tumblers and a custard cup without a handle. These held the hot stuff from the jug, however, as well as golden goblets would have done; and Bob served it out with beaming looks, while the chestnuts on the fire sputtered and cracked noisily. 
 Then Bob proposed: “A merry Christmas to us all, my dears. God bless us!  
 Which all the family re-echoed. “God bless us every one!  said Tiny Tim, the last of all. 
 He sat very close to his father’s side, upon his little stool. Bob held his withered little hand in his, as if he loved the child, and wished to keep him by his side, and dreaded that he might be taken from him. 
 “Spirit,  said Scrooge with an interest he had never felt before, “tell me if Tiny Tim will live.  
 “I see a vacant seat,  replied the Ghost, “in the poor chimney-corner, and a crutch without an owner, carefully preserved. If these shadows remain unaltered by the Future, the child will die.  
 “No, no,  said Scrooge. “Oh, no, kind Spirit! say he will be spared.  
 “If these shadows remain unaltered by the Future, none other of my race,  returned the Ghost, “will find him here. What then? If he be like to die, he had better do it, and decrease the surplus population.  
 Scrooge hung his head to hear his own words quoted by the Spirit, and was overcome with penitence and grief. 
 We know the rest of the story too, either from reading the work itself or in its many variations on film, screen, or stage. But, I hope that in some small way, this blog can help you see it with different eyes, with a new imagination. For Scrooge’s transformation is, in truth, a rebirth. As he prances about his room on Christmas morning, filled with such joy, it suddenly occurs to him: 
 “I don’t know what day of the month it is,  said Scrooge. “I don’t know how long I have been among the Spirits. I don’t know anything. I’m quite a baby. Never mind. I don’t care. I’d rather be a baby.  
 A baby? Dickens was no literary slouch; his references to scripture, when he makes them are deliberate, if subtle. He has learned the lesson of Tiny Tim, and now, finally like a little child, he is ready to receive the Kingdom of God (cf. Mt. 18.3, 19.14). 
 After Scrooge makes provisions for the day, he goes to church and then celebrates the Christmas traditions around him. They are not independent things. Christmas has reawakened his heart to joy and his imagination to hope, so that now, when faced with a plight like the suffering of Tiny Tim, he can hear and respond to the Christian call to stand against it in faith and love. 
 Dickens entitled his work a Christmas carol, that is to say, a religious hymn for Christmas – the joyous celebration of the Nativity. A few years later, he would write his thoughts on what images that Christmas music springs to his mind. They are memories of Christmas, moments to transform his imagination: 
 “Known before all the others [i.e. Christmas memories], keeping far apart from all the others, they [gathered] round my [childhood] bed. An angel, speaking to a group of shepherds in a field; some travellers, with eyes uplifted, following a star; a baby in a manger; a child in a spacious temple, talking with grave men; a solemn figure, with a mild and beautiful face, raising a dead girl by the hand; again, near a city gate, calling back the son of a widow, on his bier, to life; a crowd of people looking through the opened roof of a chamber where he sits, and letting down a sick person on a bed, with ropes; the same, in a tempest, walking on the water to a ship; again, on a sea-shore, teaching a great multitude; again, with a child upon his knee, and other children round; again, restoring sight to the blind, speech to the dumb, hearing to the deaf, health to the sick, strength to the lame, knowledge to the ignorant; again, dying upon a Cross, watched by armed soldiers, a thick darkness coming on, the earth beginning to shake, and only one voice heard, ‘Forgive them, for they know not what they do.’  
 This Christmas, may the God of the Manger fill you with Christmas joy and peace as you trust in Him, so that you may overflow with the hope of the Nativity by the power of the Holy Spirit. God bless us every one! Amen. 
 All quotes taken from Dickens, Charles. 1843. A Christmas Carol: In Prose; Being a Ghost Story of Christmas. London: Chapman & Hall. 
 Other references: 
 Chesterton, G.K. (Gilbert Keith). 1906. Charles Dickens. London: Methuen. 
 Walder, Dennis. 1981. Dickens and Religion. London: George Allen & Unwin. 

 id="file23242574" filename="God-Will-Bless" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/topics/God-Will-Bless">
 29 Bible Verses about God Will Bless 
 Most Relevant Verses 
 The Lord has been mindful of us; He will bless us; He will bless the house of Israel; He will bless the house of Aaron. 
 And I will make you a great nation, And I will bless you, And make your name great; And so you shall be a blessing; 
 indeed I will greatly bless you, and I will greatly multiply your seed as the stars of the heavens and as the sand which is on the seashore; and your seed shall possess the gate of their enemies. 
 The Lord appeared to him the same night and said, “I am the God of your father Abraham; Do not fear, for I am with you. I will bless you, and multiply your descendants, For the sake of My servant Abraham.  
 And I will bless those who bless you, And the one who curses you I will curse. And in you all the families of the earth will be blessed.  
 then I will so order My blessing for you in the sixth year that it will bring forth the crop for three years. 
 I will make them and the places around My hill a blessing. And I will cause showers to come down in their season; they will be showers of blessing. 
 You shall be blessed above all peoples; there will be no male or female barren among you or among your cattle. 
 He will love you and bless you and multiply you; He will also bless the fruit of your womb and the fruit of your ground, your grain and your new wine and your oil, the increase of your herd and the young of your flock, in the land which He swore to your forefathers to give you. 
 But one who looks intently at the perfect law, the law of liberty, and abides by it, not having become a forgetful hearer but an effectual doer, this man will be blessed in what he does. 
 Let them curse, but You bless; When they arise, they shall be ashamed, But Your servant shall be glad. 
 You shall make an altar of earth for Me, and you shall sacrifice on it your burnt offerings and your peace offerings, your sheep and your oxen; in every place where I cause My name to be remembered, I will come to you and bless you. 
 The first of all the first fruits of every kind and every contribution of every kind, from all your contributions, shall be for the priests; you shall also give to the priest the first of your dough to cause a blessing to rest on your house. 
 “All the nations will call you blessed, for you shall be a delightful land,  says the Lord of hosts. 
 He shall receive a blessing from the Lord And righteousness from the God of his salvation. 
 His descendants will be mighty on earth; The generation of the upright will be blessed. 
 and you will be blessed, since they do not have the means to repay you; for you will be repaid at the resurrection of the righteous.  
 I will bless her, and indeed I will give you a son by her. Then I will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of peoples will come from her.  
 Sojourn in this land and I will be with you and bless you, for to you and to your descendants I will give all these lands, and I will establish the oath which I swore to your father Abraham. 
 The Lord will give strength to His people; The Lord will bless His people with peace. 
 But you shall serve the Lord your God, and He will bless your bread and your water; and I will remove sickness from your midst. 
 From the God of your father who helps you, And by the Almighty who blesses you With blessings of heaven above, Blessings of the deep that lies beneath, Blessings of the breasts and of the womb. 
 The Levite, because he has no portion or inheritance among you, and the alien, the orphan and the widow who are in your town, shall come and eat and be satisfied, in order that the Lord your God may bless you in all the work of your hand which you do. 
 You shall generously give to him, and your heart shall not be grieved when you give to him, because for this thing the Lord your God will bless you in all your work and in all your undertakings. 
 Is the seed still in the barn? Even including the vine, the fig tree, the pomegranate and the olive tree, it has not borne fruit. Yet from this day on I will bless you.’  
 Bring the whole tithe into the storehouse, so that there may be food in My house, and test Me now in this,  says the Lord of hosts, “if I will not open for you the windows of heaven and pour out for you a blessing until it overflows. 

 id="file23242510" filename="happy-birthday-blessings" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://bayart.org/happy-birthday-blessings/">
 102+ POWERFUL Religious Happy Birthday Blessings & Wishes 
 Special occasions give us a chance to celebrate life and the many wonderful memories that life brings. And, there is nothing more special than leaving a special message for a beloved. 
 Using happy birthday blessings is one of the best ways to convey our wish to someone who celebrates his/her birthday. Sending religious birthday wishes to celebrant is very important in the sense that it has the ability to bring in them positive emotions, including hope and optimism. It leads to uplift one’s spirit to give him/her a boost of strength in the chapters to come. To better prepare them on the coming journey, send them birthday prayer or christian birthday wishes. 
 Reminding yourselves of your everyday blessings is a great way to practice gratitude. That’s why blessed quotes can help us remember all the good things in our lives and keep us moving forward. 
 Happy birthday wishes and messages come easy for some people. But, for others, knowing what to say or write can be difficult. Here you can get inspiration from these religious happy birthday blessings and wishes: 
 Best Happy Birthday Blessings 
 Birthdays are wonderful occasions to celebrate and these happy birthday god bless you messages will not only to bless, protect, but also motivate, inspire and fill their heart with hope for the present and future. 
 I am so grateful that you have been blessed with another fabulous year. On this blessed day, I pray that all your wishes come true and that you have eternal happiness. Happy blessed birthday to you, my dear friend. 
 Another year older is also another year of learning to pray, to love, and to feel God’s grace. Here’s to many more! Happy blessed birthday. 
 Wishing you a very happy blessed birthday, my dear. May God make His heavenly face shine on you on this special day of yours and all the days of your life. 
 Sometimes wind be very strong as a storm. Maybe your ship can sink. Who’s know? Sometimes wind be very softly as a cotton. Life is like a wind. But you never forget, it is not continuous. You will be success. Happy blessed birthday, cheers to your new years!! 
 I can never stop thanking the Almighty God for blessing my life with such a wonderful person like you. May the good Lord continue to shower you with happiness, good fortune, prosperity and good health all the days of your life, my dear. Happy blessed birthday! 
 As you celebrate your Big Day, I want you to know that with God every single dream of yours is possible. May God help you achieve all your dreams, and may He let your heart never know sadness. Happy blessed birthday. 
 May God bless you today on your birthday and every day after. May you be comforted by His presence in your life, and always follow His guiding light. Have a blessed birthday. Amen 
 I am so very blessed to have you in my life. Happy blessed birthday to a truly wonderful friend! I thank God for how very blessed I am to have you in my life! 
 Life is treasure and human understand this truth each birthday. Doubtlessly this is gift of God. Take care the gift goodly. I love you, happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 Take delight in the LORD, and he will give you the desires of your heart. Commit your way to the LORD; trust in him and he will do this. Happy blessed birthday. 
 God will richly bless your birthday and each day with joy and happiness.This life will surprise you with the happiness of smiles, the warmth of love and so on. I hope you will be forever happy. Happy blessed birthday. 
 Our Heavenly Father, who makes no mistakes, has given this life to you. Make the most of His plans, His gifts, and His hands, and He will see you through. Happy blessed birthday. 
 I want to start your Big Day with a special prayer for you. May the Lord keep protecting and guiding you along unfamiliar paths. May He always go before you and remove all the obstacles that stand in your way to happiness and success. Happy birthday my son. 
 Wishing you a day that is specially designed by the Lord for you. May you find happiness in the simple things of life. Have a nice Birthday. May God bless you. 
 The LORD bless you and keep you; the LORD make his face shine on you and be gracious to you; the LORD turn his face toward you and give you peace. Happy blessed birthday. 
 You are truly a gift from God to us. May you enjoy every moment of this special day! Happy blessed birthday. 
 It brings me so much joy to celebrate your birthday with you. I pray that our God blesses you and wraps His mighty arms of protection around you on this extra special day and forever. Happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 Happy blessed birthday! May God shower you with happiness and joy! 
 There are no birthday gifts as glorious as the one God gave to us all on this day when you were born. Happy blessed birthday. 
 May God fill your life with a brighter smile and more joy than ever. Happiest birthday dad. 
 I feel so fortunate to have you in my life because you are a light in my life. May your birthday mark the beginning of great things in your life. May the Lord surround you with peace, prosperity, true friends, and most importantly true happiness all the days of your wonderful life. 
 May God’s awesome blessings Be upon you this day And for the future years ahead, May His blessings never fade In every area of your life, May God abound much more, So you may be a fruitful vine With the abundance of the Lord. Have a blessed birthday. 
 Today I am wishing you a blessed birthday, my friend. You truly are one of God’s greatest gifts to mankind and I am so grateful for having you in my life. 
 Lots of birthday hugs and kisses for you as God gives you another year of joy, peace and fun! 
 May you know nothing but happiness from this day onward. May God protect and keep you. Have a very happy birthday. 
 May God bless you with good health, good fortune and lots of love on your special day! Have a blessed birthday. 
 Finally the highly anticipated birthday has arrived. I pray that on this special occasion, God’s awesome blessing be bestowed upon your life and may you meet with success in whatever you do. Enjoy your birthday. May God bless you! 
 Have a blessed birthday! May God always guide you and show you how much he cares about your life! 
 My wish for you is to be happy, enjoy life,follow God’s will in your life, and that you have continued success in all you do. God bless you and your family and friends! 
 Enjoy this moment to the fullest. May the heavens shower you with lots of love and blessings on this day and throughout the many years that you have in front of you. Wishing you a blessed birthday! 
 Delight yourself in the Lord and He’ll give you the desires of your heart. I know, He made you just for me. The best is yet to come! May this day bring countless happiness and endless joy and live with peace and serenity. I wish you Happy birthday friend. 
 May the light of the Lord shine upon you and grant you happiness on this birthday and for many years to come. Happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 May God guide your path and always be with you. Happy blessed birthday! 
 I pray on your birthday that your faith in God continues to grow as you grow older, and that you find comfort in God’s love for you. Wishing you many blessings on your special day. 
 Religious Happy Birthday Wishes 
 Here are some ideas to get you started your religious birthday wishes: 
 Happy blessed birthday! I pray that your special day will be filled with all the glory and the wonder of God’s unfailing love and may you feel his presence working on your life all throughout the coming years! 
 The road of faith may not always be the easiest. That’s why God gives us a choice to go our own way. It’s amazing how often those two paths reconnect further down life’s highway. Celebrate your amazing choices on this special day; Happy birthday hubby! 
 Every day is a great day to celebrate God’s wonderful works. Today is a not different but we to add prayer for you. Yes today is a great day to celebrate you, one of God’s most wondrous creations, Your type is very beautiful but most important is your character is very great. You are good good person and I know you will be until your dead. Wonderful blessed birthday!! 
 My prayer for you today is that the almighty God never cease blessing you, and that you see more remarkable days like today. Happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 On your birthday, I pray that your day is filled with joy and peace, and I give thanks to God for all that you bring to my life. Happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 On your birthday, I wish that your faith and love in God will become even and even stronger and that God’s love will keep you going. Because the human be in need just one God. All money all property are stay in the ending world. You have one rule, this is just pray to God. God is always with us. God blessing you. Best blessed birthday!! 
 I feel blessed to have had you as a friend and cherish all our memories together. I know you’re watching over me. Happy birthday in heaven. 
 May God give you the strength and wisdom to smoothly surmount all the challenges life brings you. Stay blessed and enjoy your day to the fullest. 
 On your special day, I pray that God will continue to warm your heart and lift your spirits while granting you peace and serenity on this very special day of yours. Happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 On this day of reflection consider all the beauty in the world that God has granted you and be glad to live in the light of his love. Have a blessed birthday. 
 I could say happy blessed birthday, but I won’t. Instead, I’ll shout it from the housetops and let everyone know what a super person you are! I thanked God for his unique gift. I thanked God for you! 
 May God bless you on this birthday and on every birthday that is to come until meet our God. Happy birthday to someone who is having of all of the best of everything! You are my son and also my pride. I love you son. Happy blessed birthday again and you be happy all of your life like now. 
 On this day of yours, take God’s hand and get excited for he’s got a lot of great things planned ahead of you and in the years to come. Happy birthday daughter on your day! 
 On your birthday, may you be filled with peace, joy and laughter all year round! Through the years, as you go on with your journey in life, may you continue to strengthen lives and bring glory to our God! Happy blessed birthday! 
 As you read this message I am praying for God to lift you up and to grant you all the miracles and wishes you deserve. Happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 When God created you, He had a purpose for your life. He has planned all your days before one of them came to be, so remember that you are truly special in His eyes. Happy blessed birthday! 
 The journey of life has never been smooth. Life is full of ups and downs. But I pray that the good Lord lights your path wherever you go and allows you see success all the time. Happy 50th birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 The day God made you, He made the very best gift He could have given to me. You’re always thoughtful, kind and so very inspiring. God made you to last and He always knows what He’s doing! Happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 Your faith has grown throughout the past year and I pray that it will start more grow now. Just salvation is at the our God. We will pray for God everyday. Happy blessed birthday my dear Friend. My prayer is today most beautiful because you was born. I grateful to our God. Again Happy Blessed Birthday!! 
 Rejoice, for this is the day that God made you! Please know that I am really proud to become a part of your wonderful journey in life. May you have a wonderful birthday and so many great years ahead! Happy 21st birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 Your relationship with God should be growing each day, and I pray that this birthday makes more strong your relationship to him. Happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 God is always with you but you can not to realize the one God. Maybe you are young at now. I pray that you feel his presence in a new way as you celebrate your birthday. I will pray for you. Happy blessed birthday dear!! 
 May God bless you with peace and happiness on this unique day that you celebrate. And may that divine peace and happiness follow you the rest of your life. Have a blessed and fun birthday. 
 Happy blessed birthday to you. I pray to God that He blesses you today and gives you strength to have positive thoughts and to give you success in your life. 
 It’s your faith that will make you to stay strong but it’s your birthdays that make you old. So on this birthday of yours, I pray that your faith in God will grow even stronger, happy blessed birthday! 
 Happy blessed birthday to you my friend. May you include God in all you do. Thank Him for giving again a new life. Today is the time to fulfill your dreams because God has given you a chance to change and to do better than before. 
 Happy blessed birthday to you! May God continue to provide you with enough strength to blow all those candles in your cake! But in case you need help, I’m here for you always, happy 40th birthday on your day! 
 Gracious God, I want to thank you from the bottom of my heart for privileging me with the opportunity to see another beautiful year of life. Thank You for all the blessings that You have heaped upon my life over the years. May I continue to please you for as long as I live. Thank you. 
 When God made you, he had a plan for your life. As you earn gratitude remember our God. As you fail your jobs don’t will hate our God. Just pray for him and find your fail. Happy blessed birthday my child. God will always with you. 
 On your birthday, I thank God that He made you. You have brought so much happiness, laughter, and wisdom into our life. Raising a glass in celebration of you, and sending many best wishes for your birthday nephew. 
 God is so wise that he never created friends with price tags. If He did, I wouldn’t have been able to afford a precious friend like you. Happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 Birthday Prayer 
 Sending beautiful birthday prayer to your loved ones will add a divine touch to the birthday celebration and uplift the spirits of the celebrant. 
 Irish Blessing May the road rise to meet you, May the wind be always at your back. May the sun shine warm on your face, The rains fall soft upon your fields. And until we meet again, May God hold you in the palm of His hand. 
 May God be with you and bless you, May you see your children’s children. May you be poor misfortune, Rich in blessings, May you know nothing but happiness From this day forward. 
 May the road rise to meet you May the wind always be at your back, May the warm rays of sun fall upon your home, And may the hand of a friend always be near. 
 May green be the grass you walk on, May blue be the sky above you, May pure be the joys that surround you, May true be the hears that love you. 
 May God Grant you Friendship May God grant you friendship and warm love within your home. May he surround you in the quiet peace that’s found in him alone. May his hand lead you to laughter, and his love dry every tear. As you sense his presence in your life more deeply every year. 
 A Birthday Prayer of Blessings 
 The Lord enlighten you through the teachings of Jesus Christ and strengthen you as you walk in his light. 
 The Lord give you joy as he shows you his Fatherly mercies new every morning. 
 The Lord give you wisdom in happiness, comfort in suffering, rest in death, and one day, the peace of eternal life. 
 “Happy Birthday to You  Prayer Another year of life upon this earth: 
 I hope that you have used it full and well. And yet another starting now, today: Perhaps you should rededicate your life, And give it to the Lord, who gave you yours. For all that went before has passed behind; Your future lies before you like a road. And so I pray the Lord will be with you, And dwell with you, and keep you as His own, And walk with you, beside you, down the road. And now I pray that He will make today The finest birthday that you ever had. 
 by Rev. Bill McGinnis 
 Blessings of Wisdom, Patience, and Hope May the Lord show you the greatness of his goodness, that you overflow with thanks every day. 
 May the Lord bless you abundantly with rest for the heart, power for virtue, wisdom for life, and patience in suffering. 
 May the Lord bless you with joyful hope, and one day with the inexpressible joys of eternal life. 
 May the road rise up to meet you. May the wind be always at your back. May the sun shine warm upon your face; the rains fall soft upon your fields and until we meet again, may God hold you in the palm of His hand. Traditional Irish Blessing 
 I said a Prayer for You Today I said a prayer for you today And know God must have heard. I felt the answer in my heart Although he spoke no word! I didn’t ask for wealth or fame (I knew you wouldn’t mind). I asked him to send treasures Of a far more lasting kind! I asked that he be near you At the start of each new day; To grant you health and blessings And friends to share your way! I asked for happiness for you In all things great and small. But it was for his loving care I prayed the most of all! Amen. 
 May love and laughter Light your days And warm your heart and home; May good and faithful friends be yours Wherever you may roam; May peace and plenty bless your world With joy that long endures; May all life’s passing seasons Bring the best to you and yours! Traditional Irish Blessing 
 Psalm 139 Birthday Prayer Like an open book, you watched me grow from conception to birth; all the stages of my life were spread out before you, the days of my life all prepared before I’ve even lived one day. Your Thoughts – how rare, how beautiful! God, I’ll never comprehend them! I couldn’t even begin to count them – any more than I could count the sand of the sea. Oh, let me rise in the morning and live always with you! 
 Happy Birthday Prayer Poem 
 It is such a joy to remember your birthday, And celebrate all you are. We hoped and we prayed to have a child And we were given you, our little star. 
 You’ve shone into our lives and brought Such happiness and delight. Making us so very thankful, You’re so funny, kind and bright. 
 We’ve watched you grow every day So proud of all you do. And tried to gently guide and care, We really do love you. 
 And so we pray now, giving thanks, And praise on this special day. We hope you’ll know how wonderful You are in every way 
 Christian Birthday Wishes 
 Birthdays are a wonderful time to celebrate the life God has given us and to encourage our friends and family with christian birthday wishes: 
 Should your path be obscured with darkness, I pray that God’s grace light up your path. Should your heart be burdened with fear, I pray that you reach out for His Hands and let it guide you. 
 May you truly count it all joy on your birthday today! You are a joy-filled blessing in our lives! Happy blessed birthday! 
 Look in the mirror. Yes, the person staring back at you is one of God’s most beautiful Masterpieces. Did you like until today? Did you care good to your body? İt is deposit of our God. Bless and celebrate! Have a wonderful and blessed birthday! Should your hands feel empty and your struggles pushing you to the ground, I pray that you find His Love and let it fill the void in your soul. 
 When you was born angels sang their best music to my hear. When you was born I saw the World very beautiful. Probably the sun flashed up more and God’s mercy scattered over to world more. I love you my child and ı pray everyday to God. Happy blessed birthday!! 
 Have a blessed birthday! May you be showered with blessings in the days to come! 
 Life by itself is a gift, so never forget to thank God for it. Moreover, never forget to make the most of it. Happy Birthday to you. May God bless you with abundant peace and joy. Let thanks for birthday wishes. 
 Eating too much cake is not a sin! Today is your day but you don’t will exaggeration 🙂 Refusing to share it with others is sin! İn world the most great treasure is earning other’s heart. Those is most big reward. Have a blessed birthday! 
 Your soul is precious to me and I wish you every blessing on your birthday. Happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 Happy blessed birthday to you! Today I celebrate the life that God has given you, and give thanks to Him for the many blessings you bring to my life. 
 May guardian angels be with you all the time and may sadness not know its way to your doorstep. May happiness and goodness surround you all the time. And most importantly, may God always bless you. Happy blessed birthday. 
 You are one God’s most beautiful masterpieces. Today is a day to celebrate His works and a gift to us all. Thank you for the warmth you have brought to our lives. May you have a birthday full of God’s blessings. 
 On your birthday don’t forget, God always near you and he navigate you. There is one road and it is God’s road. I believe you will not straggle from road because it is heaven’s. He always love you and don’t forget, in good has bad and in bad has good. God always know best for you. I wish you blessed, lovely and faith Birthday. 
 Wishing you a year filled with the warmth of family, the joy of friends, and the love of the Father. 
 Our Lord has given you a great gift today, be thankful and celebrate it with love and faith. Everyone around you knows just how special you are. Happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 Look at the beauty That surrounds us all, All life and nature Created by our Lord And you are, too, Created just to be Everything that God Wants you to be. Happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 God created you and sent you into this world for a purpose. It is your duty to fulfill God’s purpose. Wishing you a very Happy Birthday. May God Bless you. 
 Though you may blow out your candles, the light of the Lord will always shine on you and his warmth shall be a comfort. Happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 May God’s many blessings Be poured upon you As you celebrate today And the years that follow too May you have a real sense Of God’s hand upon your life, Leading you and guiding you As you walk with Jesus Christ. 
 Should you ever feel weak, I pray that God gives you strength to take you through. Should your heart be filled with fear, I pray that you remember to reach out to the hands of God and let Him be your guide. Wishing you many blessings on your birthday. 
 May the Lord’s veil of protection keep you warm when dread makes you shiver, May you seek the answers in His loving Grace when your heart is gripped by doubt, And May you find solace in His warm Embrace whenever you feel alone. With all my heart, I am wishing you plentiful of blessings to come in the succeeding chapters of this beautiful lifetime. Happy blessed birthday! 
 Psalm 91:16 says that “it is with long life that you satisfy the Lord and show him your salvation.  Happy birthday and be blessed! 
 I thank God today for this milestone in your life. You are a true blessing to me. May your paths be straightened by the hand of the Lord. Happy blessed birthday, my wonderful brother. 
 Today I thank God for the gift of life. I am so blessed to have you in my life, and I look forward to celebrating many more birthdays together. Happy blessed birthday! 
 May your prayer in Christ grow stronger and His blessings increase each day. May your birthday be a reminder of God’s love in your life. Happy blessed birthday! 
 May God be your guiding light and may he always protect you from all the difficulties of life. Happy Birthday Sister! 
 A fresh start begins with a sincere prayer, a humble heart and a faithful mind bearing the love of God. I believe, you have whole ability. Today is your first birthday will be. You have new papers front. You will good write or don’t but I believe you as others. Happy blessed, lovely birthday dear. 
 On your birthday, I wish that you experience Jesus’ divine presence in your life. May He enter your heart and stay in there forever. May you have a happy birthday beautiful aunt! 
 May you get a taste of God’s never-dying love for you. May your heart be open to His spiritual and divine gifts. And may you realize that He is very much present with you at this very moment. Wishing you many blessings on your birthday. 
 God is good! He has given you another year to praise him. All his love and grace upon you. Happy birthday to you and may God bless you! 
 Happy blessed birthday! May you be blessed with a long life full of nothing but happiness and peace. May you never be lonely in this life. May you always be surrounded by family and friends that love and cherish you. I wish you a joyous and blessed birthday. 
 On your birthday I want you to know that your faith and goodness are an inspiration to me everyday. 
 Nothing in this world happens for no reason. God has sent you on earth for a purpose. He has given you one more year to live, for a purpose. So best of luck on fulfilling what God wants from you. A very Happy blessed birthday to you. May God Bless you and grant you all your wishes. 
 You were born for the special purpose of being loved by God and to praise Him for His righteousness. Remember this and every birthday will be filled with gratitude. 

 id="file23242613" filename="how-does-god-bless-or-help-us" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://donewithreligion.com/2021/11/07/how-does-god-bless-or-help-us/">
 Done with Religion … Not Done with God 
 How Does God Bless Or Help Us? 
 It is often said God blesses the United States or individual situations, suggesting God’s blessings are withheld from others by God. It is important how we portray what God is really like. I am not going to do a Bible study on how God blesses others. Several viewpoints could be defended, depending on one’s interpretation of certain passages. It isn’t presumptuous though to imagine what a loving God is like though our moral intuitions. It seems intuitive a loving Creator loves the way we are created to love. How we lovingly bless others may be how a loving God would bless. 
 The way God blesses must be loving 
 Atheists and believers agree. The only God worth believing in is a perfect, loving God. Can God manipulate others? We would say no because love doesn’t manipulate. We can talk about perfect Godly love by comparing to perfect, human love. The Bible even suggests perfect human love and God’s love are the same: “Be perfect, therefore as your heavenly Parent is perfect  (Mt. 5:48). 
 God’s blessings can’t be arbitrary 
 True love can’t be arbitrary or bias. Some Christian circles teach that before one is born that God elects or blesses some with eternal life after death while excluding others. Such arbitrary love is immoral. God doesn’t arbitrarily bless some with food in their bellies and not others but pulling strings behind the scenes. There are many human reasons why one might not have enough food to eat. God and humans must somehow partner together to combat starvation. 
 God’s blessings can’t be controlling 
 We know true love can’t be controlling. Ask any adult about their parents! We hate when we see friends try to control others for their own reasons or gain. Employees can smell a controlling employer a mile away. The truth is God can’t wave a magic wand – aka as blessing some and not others – without accounting for freedom. It isn’t that you didn’t beg enough or have the right attitude. A loving God is surely always doing all they can in a free world before, during, and after our prayers. 
 Doesn’t God seek to bless through influence? 
 God seeks to influence us to do all the good we can, in all the places we can, at all the times we can, to all the people we can, as long as we can. Such a plan leads to true individual and worldly happiness in the long-run. Imagine all the regrets we save in life by being slow to anger. Imagine all the pain we spare spouses and children if we control where our eyes wander. Imagine all the friendships not destroyed by talking behind one’s back. God’s blessings can flow when we allow God’s influence in our lives to help ourselves and others. I doubt God minds sharing the credit. 
 Mike Edwards has been writing for Done with Religion for some time and has been a great addition to the site. Mike also has his own site where he writes that can be found at What God May Really Be Like He can be contacted by email at: medwar2@gmail.com 
 Unchurching – TED Talk 
 Email Us 
 Revolution Church – Podcast 
 Listen to Done with Religion writer Rocky Glenn as he talks with Jay and Caleb from Revolution Church 
 RIP Medical Debt 
 RIP Medical Debt empowers donors to forgive billions in oppressive medical debt. We are dedicated to removing the burden of medical debt for individuals and families and veterans across America. Click HERE to donate now. 
 Mike Adams is a former pastor in the institutional church who has left that environment for a more authentic expression of the Christian faith outside those four walls. 
 Search Articles 
 Doctors Without Borders help people worldwide where the need is greatest, delivering emergency medical aid to people affected by conflict, epidemics, disasters, or exclusion from health care. Help support Doctors Without Borders by making a donation here: 
 Follow us on Twitter 
 Follow Us by Email 
 Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email. 
 Wishes are more than just a nice thing A wish experience can be a game-changer for a child with a life-threatening medical condition. This one belief guides us in everything we do at Make-A-Wish®. It inspires us to grant wishes that change the lives of the kids we serve. It compels us to be creative in exceeding the expectations of every wish kid. It drives us to make our donated resources go as far as possible. Most of all, it’s the founding principle of our vision to grant the wish of every eligible child. Whatever the odds, whatever the obstacles wishes find a way to make the world better. We grant the wishes of children with life-threatening medical conditions to enrich the human experience with hope, strength and joy. To make a donation click here: 
 If you are in crisis and need support call the Trevor Lifeline at 1-866-488-7386 
 Unashamed of who God made us to be, and unapologetic in our pursuit of God and our purpose in His kingdom 
 This is where I post my essays, primarily about LGBTQ+ issues, politics, and Christian theology. 
 Welcome. My blog is a place where readers will find writings of personal experiences, thoughts, and the peace God provides throughout my walk. I intend to bring inspiration and insight, as well as providing a very personal and transparent view into my life, in order to help others see their own lives in a different perspective. I strongly believe that we all need a different view at times, in order for our personal growth to take place. 
 To those done with religion but not God and my kids (Click FOLLOW for future Posts; See ABOUT/USING THIS SITE tab to navigate Site) 
 "The glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the former, says the LORD of hosts: and in this place will I give peace, says the LORD of hosts." (Hag 2:9) 

 id="file23242715" filename="how-do-you-get-a-rosary-blessed-by-the-priest.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://raymundtamayo.com/theology/how-do-you-get-a-rosary-blessed-by-the-priest.html">
 Take your rosary with you to church. Bring your rosary to the Holy water basin that is used for dipping the fingers and blessing yourself, usually located near the church entrance. Place a few fingers into the holy water and sprinkle a few drops of holy water over your rosary. 
 Can I get blessed by a priest? 
 Priests are ordained “that whatsoever they bless may be blessed, and whatsoever they consecrate shall be consecrated . The only case in which one inferior to a priest may bless is when the deacon blesses a candle on Holy Saturday, acting as a deputy and employing incense already blessed by the celebrant. 
 How long does it take to bless a rosary? 
 It takes about 10 minutes for each set of 5 decades. You should say it or whisper the prayers aloud while meditating on the various mysteries of the Rosary. It takes about 10 minutes for each set of 5 decades. 
 Can a priest bless a necklace? 
 You can take your turquoise cross necklace to a Catholic Christian Church and at the end of the service ask the priest to bless it and perhaps “slip him (give him) a small love offering as maybe 2 dollars. 
 Can I bless my own cross? 
 Bless the cross yourself. 
 Blessing the cross yourself may not carry the same effect as a priest’s blessing, but anyone may plea to God to bless their cross or other object. … Bless this Cross in the Name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, Amen. 
 Can I say God bless to a priest? 
 I too have heard it said that, strictly speaking, it is not right to say “God bless you  to a priest, though others may have different takes on this. Usually I don’t say anything; I just kiss his hand, and if he is offering a formal blessing, this completes the blessing and its reception without any awkwardness at all. 
 Do priests still bless houses? 
 The blessing may be performed by an ordained priest or pastor, or by the owner of the house themselves. … Normally, the priest will walk from room to room, sprinkling each with holy water. As he walks, he may recite one or more passages from the holy gospel. 
 Should a rosary be blessed? 
 Sacramentals – such as holy water or blessed Rosaries – thanks to the special blessing they receive from the priest, acquire a concrete “spiritual effect  thanks to the intercession of the Church itself. That is why it is useful and praiseworthy to get our own Rosary blessed. 
 Can I ask a priest to bless my rosary? 
 Only a priest has the power to bless a rosary with these kinds of special spiritual help. However, you can bless your own rosary yourself with Holy water to bestow the beads with spiritual grace. Take your rosary with you to church. 
 Can you wear a rosary? 
 Rosaries are a very special symbol and prayer guide for Catholics, Anglicans and Lutherans. They are not meant to be worn around the neck; they are meant to be held and prayed with. … Rosaries are not meant to be worn as necklaces, and it is somewhat of a Catholic rule not to do so. 
 Does wearing a cross protect you? 
 Communicants of the Oriental Orthodox and Eastern Orthodox Churches are expected to wear baptismal cross necklaces at all times. In addition, many Christians believe that the wearing of a cross offers the wearer protection from evil. 
 Can a Bible be blessed? 
 The Bible is already blessed by God Himself. It is the Word of God. No man can add anything to it or improve it by doing anything. The Holy Spirit inspired and directed the many authors exactly what to write over a span of a few thousand years. 
 How do you ask a priest to bless you? 
 Call your local parish and ask the secretary what is the best route to take to get something blessed. Call your local parish or stop in at the Rectory and ask if you can see a priest. They will gladly bless them for you. 
 Can a rosary be blessed twice? 
 Absolutely. Yes it would, it would allow the rosary to used to obtain a plenary indulgence on the Feasts of Sts. Peter and Paul. 
 How do you bless someone with a word? 
 4 Verses to Bless Someone Today 
 Numbers 6:24–26. May the Lord Bless You. and protect you, … 
 Jeremiah 17:7–8. Blessed is the man who trusts in the Lord, And whose hope is the Lord. … 
 Psalm 20:1–5. May the Lord answer you in the day of trouble! May the name of the God of Jacob protect you! … 
 How do you bless yourself as a Roman Catholic? 
 The motion is performed by joining the first three fingers, to symbolize the Holy Trinity, and putting the two other fingers in the palm, then touching one’s forehead, below the chest, left side, then right side and finishing with open hand on the chest again with bowing head. 
 1. Catholic Church 4,673,500 18.59 2. Southern Baptist Convention 3,722,194 14.80 3. Non-Denominational Christian 
 Defining agnosticism. Agnosticism is of the essence of science, whether ancient or modern. It 
 Djibouti is a predominantly Islamic country, with 94% of citizens describing themselves as Muslim 

 id="file23242849" filename="how-extremist-christian-theology-is-driving-the-right-wing-on-democracy" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.salon.com/2021/10/31/how-extremist-christian-theology-is-driving-the-right-wing-on-democracy/">
 How extremist Christian theology is driving the right-wing assault on democracy 
 The Texas abortion law is one step toward the true goal of Christian dominionism: Destroying democratic government 
 Published October 31, 2021 12:19PM (EDT) 
 Texas Governor Greg Abbott (Photo illustration by Salon/Getty Images/Alex Trautwig/wwing) 
 -- 
 Shares 
 Progressive policies and positions are supposed to be rooted in reality and hard evidence. But that's not always the case when it comes to the culture wars that have such an enormous impact on our politics — especially not since the unexpected evangelical embrace of Donald Trump in 2016, culminating in the "pro-life" death cult of anti-vaccine, COVID-denying religious leaders. If this development perplexed many on the left, it was less surprising to a small group of researchers who have been studying the hardcore anti-democratic theology known as dominionism that lies behind the contemporary Christian right, and its far-reaching influence over the last several decades. 
 One leading figure within that small group, Rachel Tabachnick, was featured in a recent webinar hosted by the Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice (archived on YouTube here), as part of its Religion and Repro Learning Series program, overseen by the Rev. Dr. Cari Jackson. Tabachnick's writing on dominionism can be found at Talk2Action and Political Research Associates, and she's been interviewed by Terry Gross on Fresh Air. 
 Her presentation sheds important light on at least three things: First of all, the vigilante element of the Texas anti-abortion law SB 8. Second, the larger pattern of disrupting or undermining governance, including the "constitutional sheriffs" movement, the installation of overtly partisan election officials and the red-state revolt against national COVID public health policies. While Donald Trump has exploited that pattern ruthlessly, he did not create it. And third, the seemingly baffling fact that an anti-democratic minority feels entitled to accuse its opponents — including democratically elected officials — of "tyranny." 
 Some dominionist ideas — such as the biblical penalty of death by stoning — are so extreme they can easily be dismissed as fringe, others have been foundational to the modern religious right, and still more have become increasingly influential in recent years. Those latter two categories are what we need to understand most, say both Tabachnick and Jackson. 
 "One of the things that struck me, as a relative newcomer," said Jackson, a former Congregationalist minister, "was that there was not sufficient understanding about the theological frames used by many individuals who are opposed to abortion." She continued, "I'm a strategist in a lot of ways, and one important strategy, I believe, must be to understand what the teachings and the theological frames are" on the other side. Which links directly to the question of what progressive activists need to do differently in this changed environment. 
 This failure to understand the nature of dominionism has hampered activists, not just in the realm of reproductive justice, but across an entire spectrum of political issues, both cultural and economic. Jackson discussed her own background, raised within a conservative Christian worldview. 
 "I was taught a very individualistic approach," she said, "taught that we shouldn't pay taxes, because doing so enabled people who were not working, and enables people whose lifestyle we don't agree with." There's nothing new about such views, but dominionism provides believers with an even stronger foundation for them. 
 Jackson describes her current understanding of religious faith as highly intersectional: "We believe that to understand the attacks on abortion also invites us — or even requires us — to look at attacks on voting, to look at attacks on immigrants, attacks on prison reform, attacks on equal pay and on and on," she said. "It's all of the same cloth: They are all attacks on humans flourishing. That's my language. The God of my understanding wants all of us to flourish in who we are." 
 The language of dominionism is strikingly different, to put it mildly. In her webinar, Tabachnick played a clip of one of the movement's leading figures, C. Peter Wagner, providing a definition: 
 Dominion has to do with control. Dominion has to do with rulership. Dominion has to do with authority and subduing. And it relates to society — in other words what is talked about, what the values are in heaven [that] need to be made manifest here on earth. Dominion means being the head and not the tail. Dominion means ruling as kings. It says in Revelation chapter 1:6 that "he has made us kings and priests," and check the rest of that verse, it says "for dominion." So we are kings for dominion. 
 Dominionism is the theocratic idea that regardless of theological view, means, or timetable, Christians are called by God to exercise dominion over every aspect of society by taking control of political and cultural institutions. 
 Wagner, who died in 2016, is known as the founding father of the New Apostolic Reformation (NAR), one of the two main branches of dominionism, which grew out of the Pentecostal and charismatic traditions within evangelical Christianity. Dominionists in the other branch, known as "Christian reconstructionism," come out of conservative Calvinism, with a focus on bringing government and society under biblical law. They tend to be more circumspect, often obfuscating their true intentions and avoiding the word "theocracy" in favor of "theonomy," for example. But not Wagner, as can be seen in the title of his 2011 book, "Dominion!: Your Role in Bringing Heaven to Earth." The NAR talks constantly about taking dominion over the "seven mountains" of society: education, religion, family, business, government, arts and the media. 
 But it's the other branch, the Christian reconstructionists, who have excelled at strategic organizing and providing blueprints across different right-wing constituencies for almost 50 years. They are the ones Tabachnick focused most of her presentation on, specifically two key figures: Rousas John Rushdoony, the movement's master theologian, and his son-in-law Gary North, a prolific strategist, propagandist and networker who was once a staffer for Rep. Ron Paul, the libertarian hero. 
 Christian reconstructionism, Tabachnick explained, is "about bringing government in all areas of life under biblical law, a continuation of the Mosaic law in the Old Testament, with some exceptions." This dispensation would include, "according to Gary North, public execution of women who have abortions and those who advise them to have an abortion." 
 In a recent private presentation, Frederick Clarkson asked a rhetorical question: "People have long said that there should be Christian government, but if you had one, what would it look like? What would it do? Rushdoony was the first to create a systematic theology of what Christian governance should be like, based on the Ten Commandments, and all of the judicial applications he could find in the Old Testament — including about 35 capital offenses." 
 But the "Handmaid's Tale"-style extremism of dominionists' ultimate vision shouldn't really be our focus, Tabachnick told Salon. "Nobody cares about the theocratic, draconian future envisioned by reconstructionists because they don't believe it will happen," she said. 
 What's happening right now, however, is that this ideology has had tremendous impact on more immediate politics. "Christian reconstructionism is the merger of a distinct brand of Calvinism with Austrian School economics," Tabachnick said. "In other words, it's an interpretation of the Bible grounded in property rights." The results have been far-reaching: 
 For more than 40 years, its prolific writers have provided the foundations and strategic blueprints for the attacks on liberation theology and the social gospel, as well as many other streams of Christianity which do not share the Reconstructionists' belief in unfettered capitalism as ordained by God and its fierce anti-statism. 
 The larger religious right's attack on public education, the social safety net and most government functions are largely grounded in the writings, strategies and tactics formulated by reconstructionist writers. Reconstructionism is not the only (and certainly not the first) source of interposition and nullification in this country. However, much of what is currently being taught today about using interposition to undermine the legitimacy of government is sourced in reconstructionism. 
 This idea of "interposition" comes through what's known as the doctrine of the "lesser magistrate," which we'll return to below. But its significance — especially in the post-2020 Republican Party — has only recently become apparent. Reconstructionism's initial appeal was more immediately, as Tabachnick explained in the seminar: 
 What Rushdoony provided is a package that included attacking what these fundamentalists hated and feared most in society, often expressed in terms of "This is communist. This is socialist." But Rushdoony provided a way to sacralize these ideas, and at the same time not just tear down the old order, but provide a blueprint for the new order. 
 Everyone didn't have to agree on the blueprint, she said: "Rushdoony's ideas went out in bits and pieces. The Christian right leaders took what they wanted and discarded what they didn't." 
 "Christian reconstructionism, as articulated by Rushdoony, provided a standard by which everyone else had to measure themselves," Clarkson told Salon. "Not everyone on the Christian right agreed with Rushdoony and his fellow Reconstructionist thinkers on, for example, the contemporary application of capital crimes listed in the Old Testament. And followers were often at pains to distinguish themselves." 
 Clarkson cites the case of conservative Presbyterian theologian Francis Schaeffer, who disagreed with Rushdoony on the applicability of biblical law, but became a driving force behind the anti-abortion activist movement Operation Rescue. That "militant Schaefferism," Clarkson said, "led activists to think: What's next, beyond political protest and stopping abortion? This is where the conversation has been in the Christian right for decades." 
 The doctrine of the "lesser magistrate," mentioned above, first emerged into public discourse out of Operation Rescue. But it did so as part of a larger, more complicated story. 
 There's a long history of right-wing opposition to federal authority, particularly grounded in the 19th-century defense of slavery and continuing in the defense of Jim Crow segregation. In his famous "I Have a Dream" speech, the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. spoke specifically of the governor of Alabama "having his lips dripping with the words of interposition and nullification." 
 As detailed by Randall Balmer in "Bad Faith: Race and the Rise of the Religious Right," the religious right wasn't initially fueled by opposition to the Roe v. Wade decision in 1973, but by opposition to a lesser-known decision in 1971, Green v. Connally, which threatened the tax-exempt status of racially discriminatory institutions, most famously the evangelical stronghold Bob Jones University. 
 Anti-abortion activists have long sought not just to bury that past but to stand it on its head, somehow equating Roe v. Wade with the notorious Dred Scott decision of 1857 and claiming the moral heritage of abolitionism. 
 "Throughout these movements there is also an attempt to turn the tables on the claims of racism," Tabachnick said in her webinar. "This is one of the roles that anti-abortion activism as abolition plays. Also, there's a promotion of narratives that provide a different history and legal justifications for interposition, nullification and even secession. One of the things that Christian reconstructionism has added to this dialogue is the concept of the lower magistrate." 
 As Tabachnick explains it, the "lesser magistrate" is a heroic figure who "resists the tyranny of a higher authority" — defining "tyranny" in biblical terms, potentially including any number of popular or common-sense laws or policies. This notion first gained salience in the anti-abortion context in the 1980s and '90s, as Tabachnick went on to explain. 
 "Many violent anti-abortionists have justified their actions in reconstructionist teachings," she said. "One of these was Paul Hill, who studied under one of the major reconstructionist leaders and corresponded with others." Hill went on to murder Dr. John Britton, a physician who performed abortions, as well as Britton's personal bodyguard, in 1994. Hill was executed in 2003, but the reconstructionist movement sought to cast him out well before that. 
 "Gary North responded, after the murders had taken place, in a book called 'Lone Gunners for Jesus,'" Tabachnick said. His message to Hill was, "You're going to burn in hell, you've been excommunicated. This was because Paul Hill stepped outside the bounds of the guidelines set by the movement." 
 To explain this, she quoted a passage from another book by North that offered qualified support for Operation Rescue: "We need a statement that under no circumstances will Operation Rescue or any of its official representatives call for armed resistance to civil authority without public support from a lesser magistrate." 
 "On the basis of their belief of what the law or the word of God is, they are allowed — on the advice, on the interposition, of a lesser magistrate — to commit acts of violence," Tabachnick continued. North was seeking to control or curb anti-abortion terrorism, but without rejecting it in principle. Murdering abortion providers — or even murdering women seeking abortions — could be morally justified, with the blessing of a lesser magistrate. 
 This is relevant to SB 8 in Texas in at least two ways. That bill bans abortions after six weeks and is enforced not by state officials, but by deputizing private individuals to sue anyone who performs the procedure or "aids and abets" it. First of all, giving private individuals these vigilante-style rights seems a lot like making them into "lesser magistrates," however narrowly constrained. 
 Second, the Supreme Court's refusal to stay the law — which clearly violates the Constitution and existing precedent, as Justice Sonia Sotomayor argued in her dissent — can be seen as an example of the doctrine in action. In more normal circumstances, the court would have stayed the law pending consideration on the merits, even if a majority of justices intended to overturn precedent. That's how common law has worked for centuries. 
 But biblical law isn't common law, especially as reconstructionists understand it. Under the doctrine of the "lesser magistrate," Roe is not precedent but an instance of tyranny — and the justices have a duty to God to resist it. Of course, not even Amy Coney Barrett or Clarence Thomas has said anything like that, but it's entirely consistent with their behavior — as well as with their silence, since openly making such an argument would clarify just how radicalized they have become. But adherents of the doctrine of the lesser magistrate must surely appreciate the drift in direction. 
 Nor is the doctrine limited to abortion cases, as already noted. Matthew Trewhella is a pastor who was a prominent leader of violence-prone wing of the anti-abortion movement in 1990s, and author of the 2013 book, "The Doctrine of the Lesser Magistrates," which greatly heightened its visibility. 
 "Trewhella is now all over radio and the internet," Tabachnick said in her webinar, "claiming to meet with state legislators and attorney generals at the moment, with the cause of fighting the 'tyranny of mask mandates' and vaccination for COVID. So you can see how this is a concept that is not just limited to abortion. It is a concept that can be used in resistance of government authority all over the country in all different kinds of ways — FEMA, EPA, Bureau of Land Management and so forth." 
 Trewhella isn't breaking new ground here. Clarkson's 1997 book "Eternal Hostility" describes him making similar arguments in a speech to an anti-tax group in Wisconsin. He was just one figure among many spreading the seeds of reconstructionist resistance to federal authority among militia members, "freemen" and anti-abortion activists at the time. 
 "This movement believes that rights come from God and not from any government," Tabachnick told Salon. "Therefore, any 'rights' that conflict with their interpretation of God's law are not actually rights. They are 'humanist' or a product of man's laws and not God's laws. This theme of 'human rights' versus inalienable rights from God has been at the center of the Christian Reconstructionist movement since its beginnings." 
 She pointed to "What's Wrong With Human Rights," an excerpt from a book of the same name by the Rev. T. Robert Ingram published in "The Theology of Christian Resistance," a collection edited by North. Ingram sweeps aside the Bill of Rights as "a statement of sovereign powers of states withheld from the federal authority of the Union," and turns instead to the Virginia Declaration of Rights, authored by George Mason in 1776. 
 The first section of the Virginia Declaration, beginning "That all Men are by Nature equally free and independent, and have certain inherent Rights," is dismissed by Ingram for omitting any mention of God, as an "error of unbelief which falsifies all the rest that is said about human life." The second, beginning "That all power is vested in, and consequently derived from the People; that Magistrates are their Trustees and Servants, and at all Times amenable to them," he dismisses as well: "The meaning could not be more clear, nor more opposite Biblical thought. The ruling proposition of Scripture and Christian doctrine is that 'power belongeth unto God.'" In short, there are no human rights. 
 The connection to the doctrine of the lesser magistrate is clear: Power comes from God, not the people. Whatever the people want is irrelevant. Whatever laws they may pass are irrelevant, too, if they go against God. "Tyranny" is whatever the Christian reconstructionist decides he doesn't like. 
 Elsewhere, Ingram denigrates freedom of speech and the press: 
 Freedom of speech and freedom of press are, in fact, applied seriously only to giving government protection to instigators of riot and rebellion, as well as those who would undermine human order by more subtle attacks on morals and customs. 
 As for the right to dissent, he calls it "not a lawful claim to own or to do something, which is the true right," but "a turning upside down of right and wrong, calling good evil and evil good." Similarly, there is no scriptural right to "resist authority," only that granted by the false doctrine of "human rights." 
 Ingram's interpretation of the Civil War is that "Yankee radicals inflamed the Northern peoples to mount the Civil War in the name of a 'human right' to be free ... if they did not destroy the whole Southern Order, they did at least dismantle its vast and efficient plantation economy." The civil rights movement, unsurprisingly, is understood as a defiance of "Tradition, law, and custom, which preserved public peace and order in the bi-racial state of the union, both North and South," and became "the target of the right to resist in the 60's, the supposed human rights justifying the violent means." 
 Tabachnick didn't dig into this text in her webinar, but it serves to illustrate her central principle: "This attack on the very concept of 'human rights' can be found throughout today's religious right." 
 Jackson told Salon that the most important part of Tabachnick's presentation came "when she talked about humanism and the humanistic frame, from the Constitution and the Bill of Rights. Those who are within the dominionist camp see that as contrary to God. I read those same documents and I say, this is pointing us toward the direction that God wants for us. They look at it and see that as counter to God, because humanism from their perspective is something very contrary to God." 
 If we take such arguments seriously, then we understand why for dominionists there is nothing wrong with breaking any law at all, so long as "God wills it" and you have the blessing of a so-called lesser magistrate. This is the reconstructionist argument supporting a whole range of chaotic right-wing activity today, including baseless claims that the 2020 election was a fraud. After all, the fundamental reconstructionist argument is that all such democratic government is illegitimate. 
 "The goal of reconstructionism is to tear down the existing order and reconstruct a new society based on biblical law," Tabachnick said. "Even if we assume that this vision of a theocratic America will never come to fruition, it's important to recognize the movement's impact on the ideas, strategies and tactics of the larger religious right and its role in sacralizing the actions of other anti-statist fellow travelers. 
 "As I wrote almost a decade ago, the theocratic libertarianism of Christian reconstructionism has been surprisingly seductive to Tea Partiers and young libertarians — many of whom may not realize what is supposed to happen after the government is stripped of its regulatory powers." 
 Paul Rosenberg 
 Paul Rosenberg is a California-based writer/activist, senior editor for Random Lengths News, and a columnist for Al Jazeera English. Follow him on Twitter at @PaulHRosenberg. 

 id="file23242743" filename="how-much-do-you-tip-a-priest-for-house-blessing.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://raymundtamayo.com/theology/how-much-do-you-tip-a-priest-for-house-blessing.html">
 How much do you pay for house blessing? 
 You should call your church office and schedule a house Blessing. There is no cost, or should pay be asked. A house blessing is a Sacramental. If you are asked to pay for it, you are not talking to a real Priest. 
 How much do you tip a priest at last rites? 
 Priests do not receive tips. You may give them a donation, gift offering, or stipend. This donation is not mandatory. 
 Will a priest bless my house? 
 The blessing may be performed by an ordained priest or pastor, or by the owner of the house themselves. … Normally, the priest will walk from room to room, sprinkling each with holy water. As he walks, he may recite one or more passages from the holy gospel. 
 What should I prepare for Catholic house blessing? 
 How to Prepare for a House Blessing 
 Candles. Choose long candles as they symbolize long life. … 
 Coins. Coins (and candies) for abundance. … 
 Candies. 
 Priest. We visited the village chapel weeks before the event and they recommended a priest for us. … 
 What is a good scripture for a house blessing? 
 1 Samuel 25:6 “And thus you shall greet him: ‘Peace be to you, and peace be to your house, and peace be to all that you have.  I don’t know about you but I want a peaceful house and I know I can’t achieve that by myself. This a simple blessing prayer to say as you enter any home. 
 How do you pray for house blessings? 
 Dear God, I thank you for my family, I pray that throughout this home we will be able to feel your presence. I pray for each of my family members that you would bless them and protect them as they go about their day and help point their eyes towards you, In Jesus name, Amen. 
 What does a priest say to a dying person? 
 The first prayer is for the anointing of the sick. … It goes, “Through this holy anointing may the Lord in his love and mercy help you with the grace of the Holy Spirit. May the Lord who frees you from sin save you and raise you up.  The priest will then say the Lord’s Prayer. 
 How much do you give priest for funeral? 
 A thank-you note or card should be sent separately from the honorarium. It is considered inappropriate to ask the clergy what fee they “charge  for funerals. A typical honorarium is $150–300, in consideration of the hours spent with the family and performing the service. 
 Is it OK to give money to a priest? 
 Yes a priest can accept money from peopler for any services rendered or as a gift. Whenever a priest acts outside the normal priestly functions for the benefit of others, it is usual that a monetary gift be given. 
 How do I bless my house? 
 How to bless your home. 
 Set the tone by playing calming music, and ask everyone to stand in a circle. 
 Welcome and thank your friends and family for being a part of this special occasion. 
 Light a pink candle (pink brings the energy of love and kindness) and pass it to each new person, who then shares a blessing. 
 21.02.2020 
 Can a deacon bless a house? 
 Deacons are not able to give a blessing or perform any sacraments. They are simply servants. A deacon cannot give a house blessing. 
 How do I bless and anoint my house? 
 Steps to take to anoint your house: 
 Remove any items from your home that might have its roots in evil. … 
 Pray aloud in every room that you enter and invite the Holy Spirit into your home. 
 Rebuke the forces of evil. … 
 Plead the blood of Jesus over every room and every corner of your home. 
 Can you bless your own house with holy water? 
 Your home is the domestic Church and is in search for spiritual protection. You can sprinkle holy water in your home yourself, or call a priest to formally bless your home using holy water as part of the house blessing ceremony. 
 How do you do a prayer walk through your house? 
 DOING A PRAYER WALK THROUGH TO CLEANSE YOUR HOME 
 You can use scriptures or thank God for blessings or pray for protection over your home and family. While inside, pray over each doorway, walk throughout the room saying your prayer or scriptures, and then move to the next room until you are finished. 
 Why do you bless a house? 
 House blessings (also known as house healings, house clearings, house cleansings and space clearing) are rites intended to protect the inhabitants of a house or apartment from misfortune, whether before moving into it or to “heal  it after an occurrence. 
 1. Catholic Church 4,673,500 18.59 2. Southern Baptist Convention 3,722,194 14.80 3. Non-Denominational Christian 
 The Colony of Massachusetts Bay Massachusetts Bay Colony Religion Congregationalism Government Puritan theocracy and 

 id="file23242720" filename="how-we-are-blessed-to-be-a-blessing" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://wordsbyandylee.com/how-we-are-blessed-to-be-a-blessing/">
 How are We Blessed to be a Blessing? 
 What Does it Mean to Be Blessed? 
 Have you ever wondered if our idea of “blessed  is different from God’s? I mean, it’s easy to feel “blessed  when everything is going great, but it’s really hard to see the blessings when life is a struggle. 
 Although many of us feel this way, and many preachers teach a health and wealth gospel, we must be very careful with our theology. God’s presence and blessing did often bring great fortune and peace to His people when they worshiped Him alone. There are Old Testament narratives of His absence due to their rebellion causing drought and suffering. But never base your theology only on the Old Testament nor the New. To understand what it means to be blessed by God we must use the whole counsel of the Word from Genesis to Revelation. 
 Abraham was Blessed 
 This is how God works. Our blessings are not just for us; they bless others. This has always been God’s intent. God blessed Abraham with Isaac, and yet Abraham never saw the blessing he became to generations. His faith through the many year of waiting proved his righteousness. Abraham fathered a nation, but more than that, his faith became the example of salvation to come, salvation found in trusting Jesus just as Abraham trusted God even when there seemed no hope at all for the promise to be fulfilled. 
 Blessed According to Jesus 
 If we only study the OT, it does seem that health and wealth prove blessing, but Jesus does not teach this. He said, 
 Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.  
 Matthew 5: 2 
 This “blessed  means to be fully satisfied. Honestly, sometimes our “blessings  can get in the way of our need for God; can’t they? So, it’s good to be in need. He also said people who face persecution for their faith are blessed. . . . fully satisfied. Suffering is a blessing in the New Testament. 
 Such wording seems contradictory. It’s as if the Old Testament does not belong with the New, but Jesus explained that He wasn’t negating the OT covenant of blessings and curses. He said, 
 “Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them. 18 For truly I tell you, until heaven and earth disappear, not the smallest letter, not the least stroke of a pen, will by any means disappear from the Law until everything is accomplished. 
 Matthew 5:17 
 What Did Jesus mean by “Fulfilling  the Law 
 I’ve heard it said that “fulfilling  meant “to explain or demonstrate  something. So, Jesus did not end the the Law and wipe out the beautiful story of the Old Testament, He was the rest of the story. . . the continuation of a Holy God’s plan to live with man. 
 So, what does this have to do with being blessed? Well, let’s put it all together. Let’s live lives that embody the Old Testament glory with the New. As we continue to study the book of Ruth this week and dig through the scriptures on the Bite of Bread reading plan, we will come to understand how we are now blessed to be a blessing as Abraham was. The Holy Spirit is our key. (Here’s an article about my experience with Holy Spirit.) 
 As you read over the sneak peek of the BoB scriptures and prompts, don’t skip over them! Some of the prompts explain the ancient words, and how they affect the meaning of the verse. 
 Bite of Bread Reading Plan and Prompts 
 Just then Boaz arrived from Bethlehem and greeted the harvesters, “The Lord be with you!  
 “The Lord bless you!  they answered. 
 Prompt: Boaz arrived from Bethlehem just as Ruth began gleaning behind the harvesters in his field. The miqreh (destiny) continued. God’s timing is always perfect, isn’t it? From this greeting we gather what kind of man Boaz was. How do think people perceive you by your language/greeting? 
 Tuesday: Genesis 12:2-3 
 “I will make you into a great nation, and I will bless you; I will make your name great, and you will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and whoever curses you I will curse; and all peoples on earth will be blessed through you.  
 Prompt: “Bless  in this verse and Ruth 2:4 is the Hebrew word Barak (Baw-rak). This word comes from a root word that means to kneel. I find that interesting. Can you imagine God kneeling down as He blessed Abraham? We have such a kind, humble, loving God. He’s worthy of our bent knees. Our bent knee to God blesses Him. Of course, ours is one of worship. If your knees allow, spend some time on your knees in prayer today blessing God. 
 The Lord turned to him and said, “Go in the strength you have and save Israel out of Midian’s hand. Am I not sending you?  
 “Pardon me, my lord,  Gideon replied, “but how can I save Israel? My clan is the weakest in Manasseh, and I am the least in my family.  
 The Lord answered, “I will be with you, and you will strike down all the Midianites, leaving none alive.  
 Prompt: When Boaz arrived in Bethlehem, he greeted his workers with the words, “The Lord be with you.  This greeting of blessed the recipients because they believed God’s presence made everything good. Hardship proved His absence. If you’re familiar with the Bible, you’ve gotta love Gideon’s story. God called Gideon to save the nation promising His presence. 
 Now, we live on the other side of the Cross and the Holy Spirit. We can always have God’s presence. How has your life changed with Holy Spirit’s presence? How has His presence blessed you? Is this different from the world’s idea of ‘blessed’? (If you want to know more about Holy Spirit please leave a comment or e-mail me.) 
 “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.  
 Prompt: The Greek word Makarioi means to be ‘fully satisfied.’ The kingdom of heaven waits for those who have a needy heart, a heart who needs King Jesus. When we’ve surrendered our control to our King, we can experience contentment and satisfaction. Are you blessed in this way? If you aren’t, what do you think is keeping you from this blessing? 
 Friday: Matthew 5: 14-16 
 “You are the light of the world. A town built on a hill cannot be hidden.Neither do people light a lamp and put it under a bowl. Instead they put it on its stand, and it gives light to everyone in the house. In the same way, let your light shine before others, that they may see your good deeds and glorify your Father in heaven. 
 Prompt: Who receives glory when we do good things? How will you shine your light today blessing those around you and bringing glory to God? 
 Join Me Thursday Night to Go Deeper 
 If this intrigued you, it fed your soul a little, and you’d like to hear more, come on over to my house Thursday night via Facebook LIVE at 7:30 ET! We’ll gather our Bibles, journals, Bite of Bread reading plans or Book of Ruth Key Word Bible study (which many of you are using!), and we’ll get our virtual Bible study on! We spend about thirty minutes together digging deeper and letting God’s Word feed us. Just follow me on FB and show up on my timeline around 7:30. If FB isn’t your thing, you can watch my YouTube channel later. If you search for “Andy Lee Bible  you’ll find me. Subscribe to get a fresh teaching in your e-mail. 
 Thanks for stopping by! Leave a comment about your view of “blessed.  What do you think? 
 Digging Deep, 
 Andy 
 PS. Here’s last week’s teaching on the destiny of a believer. 
 Share this: 
 Like this: 
 2 Comments 
 […] next 30 days of November focused on blessing others and helping our family do the same. We are blessed to be a blessing just as God told […] 
 Such a good word, Andy. Reminds me of when the disciples asked Jesus whose sin caused the man to be born blind in John 9:2-3. They assumed his disability proved God hadn’t blessed him. And poor Abraham was promised a nation and finally gave birth to only one son followed by two grandsons. God’s blessings and timing aren’t always what we think. 

 id="file23242794" filename="if-theres-one-god-why-all-the-different-religions" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://leewoof.org/2012/11/05/if-theres-one-god-why-all-the-different-religions/">
 If there’s One God, Why All the Different Religions? 
 Do you Have to be Christian to Go to Heaven? 
 Since there are so many religions, which one is right? 
 Why are there so many religions? Isn’t there only one God? Why didn’t God say the same thing to everyone? How do I know which religion is right? 
 Perhaps God does speak the same truth to people all around the world. The question is, when God speaks, what do people hear? 
 Two people can listen to the same story and come away with very different meanings. We hear what we need to hear in order to face our own particular challenges. People of different times and cultures hear God differently, according to their own cultural and spiritual conditions. 
 It’s not that God is different for different people. God is eternally the same. It’s that we humans are different from one another, and we each see God in our own way. God gives every person and every culture what’s needed to know and love God, and to love and serve their fellow human beings. 
 It is common for people think their religion is the right one. Many Christians say you have to believe in Jesus to go to heaven. Yet the Bible does not focus as much on what we believe as it does on how we live. People who live good, conscientious lives of service to others are living in the spirit of Christ no matter what name they may use for God. 
 Does God have a multiple personality disorder? 
 At last count, there were . . . well . . . I won’t even try to count all the different religions in the world! Besides the large, well-known world religions such as Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, and Judaism, there are countless smaller religions, including many varieties of traditional, cultural, and nature-based religions, throughout the world. There are also a billion or so people who don’t belong to any particular religion, either because they are atheist or agnostic or because they follow their own personal spiritual beliefs. 
 All of the religions have some concept of God—although some do not talk much about God. However, if we ask adherents of the various religions what God is like, we will get many different descriptions. Within the different religions God has been pictured as a male or female human being, as various kinds of mammals, birds, fish, reptiles, and insects, as a being with a human body and the head of an animal, as a tree or a plant, as lightning and thunder, as the sun, moon, or stars, and in many other ways. 
 When we start talking about the different mental and emotional characteristics of God, things get even more interesting. God loves and hates, is wrathful and merciful, is omniscient and forgetful, is unchanging yet relents from punishments that were planned, is all-forgiving but condemns everyone who doesn’t believe or do certain things. 
 Does God have a multiple personality disorder? How could one God be so many different things all at once? How could God be so many contradictory things at the same time? After all, if we ask people of the various religions how they know what God is like, most them will say that their beliefs originally came from God. 
 Are all religions except mine wrong? 
 Okay, there’s another possibility. Maybe all of those religions got it wrong. 
 Or maybe there is one that got it right. The religion I believe in! It may be Christianity or Islam, Hinduism or Buddhism, but if it’s my religion, it must be the right one. Otherwise why would I believe it? 
 It’s funny, isn’t it? No matter what religion we look at, the people who believe in it think they are the ones who have the real truth about God—and that all the other religions are a little bit off . . . or a lot off. 
 Of course, there are many religious people who take a broader view. But what about all the people who say that if you don’t believe in my religion, God will condemn you? What about all those Christians who say that you can’t be saved and go to heaven unless you believe in Jesus Christ? 
 If people in every religion claim that theirs is the right one and everyone else’s is wrong, how can we believe any of them? And why didn’t God make it a lot clearer to us humans on earth exactly what we’re supposed to believe about God and heaven? 
 Who’s confused, anyway? God or humans? 
 Let’s tackle some of these questions. The first thing to recognize is that God didn’t make all those religions, people did. 
 “What?  you say, “Didn’t God talk to all those prophets and write all those books for all those religions?  Yes, God has spoken to many prophets, priests, and ordinary people over the ages. Some of them have written down what God said to them, and those books have become the sacred texts of the various religions. 
 But have you ever had the experience of saying one thing, and having the person you were talking to hear something different? Just because God said something to a priest or prophet, that doesn’t mean the listener heard exactly what God said. In fact, psychologists tell us that we humans always interpret what we hear according to what we have experienced, and according to how we understand the world around us. 
 Let’s take a simple example: the words “I love you.  We might think these would have the same meaning no matter who we say them to. But think about the different ways this simple, common phrase will be heard by a child, a spouse, a parent, a friend. Now think of how it would be heard by someone who has just screamed in your face, “I hate your guts!  How would it be heard by a child you have just disciplined? How would it be heard by an elderly parent whom you have just moved into a nursing home against her will? 
 In exactly the same way, although God says the same thing to all people everywhere, each one of us hears it differently according to our own particular culture, experiences, and beliefs. The difference is not in God, but in the listeners. God says “I love you  to people in all times, places, and cultures. Each one hears that message in a unique way. The many and varied sacred texts of humanity are the result. 
 So which is the best religion? 
 Mine is, of course! 
 But seriously, if God is infinitely loving and infinitely wise, as the theologians and mystics of all the major world religions say, don’t you think God would do a good job of providing religion for the people on earth? Don’t you think God would provide a way for all people to experience God’s love and wisdom? 
 We could argue until the cows come home about which religion is the best or truest, and it would be a monumental waste of breath. God is not concerned about which religion is better than other religions. God is concerned with how well each religion brings its people closer to God, and how well each religion moves its believers to love and serve their fellow human beings. 
 So the short answer is: Each religion is best for the people who believe in it. If God truly is loving and wise, wouldn’t God provide every person and every culture with the religion that works best for them? Would a loving God really leave vast segments of the world’s population out in the cold? We humans come in all different varieties. And we need a variety of religions to help us find God, faith, and compassion for our fellow human beings, each in our own unique way. 
 Don’t you have to believe in Jesus to be saved? 
 Perhaps you really want to believe that God is present in all religions. 
 But what about all those Christian preachers who say that if you don’t believe in Jesus you’ll go to hell? And what about all the Bible passages they quote? Is it possible to believe the Bible and still think that non-Christians can go to heaven? 
 First of all, the Bible itself is full of people from different religions. Before Christ came, there was not a single Christian on earth. Everything in the Old Testament was originally about how people could be saved before Christianity even existed. In the New Testament John the Baptist, Jesus, and Jesus’ Apostles preached their message to Jews and non-Jews alike. And though traditional Christian preachers have selected the passages that command us to believe in Jesus, they have pushed aside a far greater number of passages in both the Old Testament and the New Testament that command us to love God, love the neighbor, and obey God’s commandments if we wish to be saved. 
 The Apostle Paul clearly stated what non-Christians must do to be saved, before he made his famous statements about being saved by faith in Jesus Christ: 
 God will repay everyone according to what they have done. To those who by patiently doing good seek glory, honor, and immortality, he will give eternal life. But for those who are self-seeking and who reject the truth and follow evil, there will be wrath and anger. There will be anguish and distress for everyone who does evil, the Jew first and also the Gentile; but glory, honor, and peace for everyone who does good, the Jew first and also the Gentile. For God does not show favoritism. (Romans 2:6–11) 
 He then goes on to talk about related issues of law and conscience, concluding that all of this will take place “through Jesus Christ  (Romans 2:16). 
 Paul’s later statements in the same letter about the necessity of faith in Jesus Christ are intended for Christians. His letters are addressed to the groups of Christian believers in various towns and cities. And of course, if you say you’re a Christian but you don’t believe in Jesus Christ, you’re in trouble, because you are rejecting your God. 
 Is God prejudiced? 
 It all boils down to this: Is God narrow-minded or broad-minded? Does God provide salvation only for one part of the world’s people who believe the “right  way? Or does God provide salvation for all of the world’s people? 
 Both the Bible and common sense say that God will accept into heaven those who live good lives according to their own conscience and their own religious laws, while those who selfishly reject the truth and live evil and destructive lives will suffer the consequences. 
 For Christians, this means believing in Jesus Christ and living according to his teachings in the Gospels. For Jews it means believing in God and living according to the Torah. For Muslims it means believing in Allah and living according to the Qur’an. Those who believe in God, and live a good life according to their beliefs, are showing their faith in God by their actions. And even those who say they don’t believe in God but live a good life according to their conscience are following God’s law. 
 Jesus taught that action trumps words in this brief tale: 
 “What do you think? There was a man who had two sons. He went to the first and said, ‘Son, go and work today in the vineyard.’ 
 “‘I will not,’ he answered, but later he changed his mind and went. 
 “Then the father went to the other son and said the same thing. He answered, ‘I will, sir,’ but he did not go. 
 “Which of the two did what his father wanted?  
 “The first,  they answered. (Matthew 21:28–31) 
 And even more directly: 
 Not everyone who says to me, “Lord, Lord,  will enter the kingdom of heaven, but only those who do the will of my Father who is in heaven. (Matthew 7:21) 
 In short, salvation is based, not on mere words, but on action. And those who do the will of God by living good lives according to their beliefs and their conscience are showing their faith in God, whether they call it faith or not. 
 Then why do we need Jesus Christ? 
 If people of all religions can be saved, why do we need Jesus Christ? Good question! In fact, it’s such a good question that it needs its own article. See “Who is God? Who is Jesus Christ? What about that Holy Spirit?  But for now, consider this: If Jesus Christ really is God as Christians say he is, doesn’t that mean he is God for all people, and not just for those who call themselves Christians? 
 It doesn’t matter what name we call God (as long as it’s nice!). No matter what name we use, it is the same God we’re calling on. There’s only one of ’em, you know! 
 And no matter how many different ways we may hear God’s voice, it is the same message being given through all the religions of the earth: Love God and love your fellow human beings. Live by the truth, live with compassion. Do not do what is evil and say what is false, but follow God’s commandments and engage in good deeds of useful service for others. 
 All who do these things, no matter what their religion, are part of the spiritual community that is God’s universal church on earth, and will be part of God’s heaven when they pass into the spiritual world. 
 Share this: 
 Like this: 
 Related 
 Lee Woofenden is an ordained minister, writer, editor, translator, and teacher. He enjoys taking spiritual insights from the Bible and the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg and putting them into plain English as guides for everyday life. 
 361 comments on “If there’s One God, Why All the Different Religions?  
 For what it’s worth I see God as the hub (the centre of all) and all the religions as the spokes. As you say, we can hear the message in different ways but we are all connected to one God. Thanks for another thought-provoking and enlightened post. Peace. 
 This is a great post. While not a Christian, I feel as you do on this topic… One light, many candles, as the saying goes. It isn’t any more complicated than that… 
 Thanks for stopping by, DougDoesLife, and for your comment. Glad you enjoyed the post! 
 God bless your efforts in getting the word out. I stumbled upon this after writting the following: . Please I ask in the name of God for all who love Him to please consider…. first the fact that He loves us, second, the fact that He loves us all equally. I ask that for a moment you focus on God and not the beliefs or rules of your religion. 
 Focus on God’s love for you, removing from your mind everything you ever learned from your religion and allowing God’s love in. Consider why you are the religion that you are. You are the religion you are for the most part because of your ancestry. Had you been born to another family of another religion…. you would believe that religion. Not only would you believe it, you would believe it to be the one, the only true religion. Now consider as I believe we all do, the existence of a supreme being, of one God. How do you see God? Our impressions of Him have largely been dictated by our religious upbringing. With that being said and your focus on the God of love, please consider….that maybe what our religion has taught us is not entirely accurate. I believe at the root of all Godly religions is love. Because interpretations of God’s message in writing can vary among individuals of even the same religion, and because no holy book was written dictated from the audible voice of God, please consider removing what you have learned and instead asking God to speak to your heart directly. Know that He WILL! God exposes what’s wrong to bring about right. He will provide His truths to every individual who asks. 
 Everyone…please help spread the word. Share and welcome others into God’s family regarless of religious beliefs. 
 Thanks Lee, Thank you God for leading me here to share my mutual belief. 
 Only thing I didn’t like about the article was that I can tell you believe in god more than not because you put if you believe in him or not as long as you do good he will let you into heaven it’s being a bit ignorant to the fact that there’s no proof he’s real it’s as if I said if you believe in god or not it doesn’t matter because he’s not real but at least you were a good person the real this is no one knows if heaven exist but we all know that being a good person does make a better world why not concentrate on bettering this world and not talking about heaven as if we know it’s there 
 Thank you for these inspiring words. I’m usually very down about my beliefs cuz of what uneducated people say about my religion, but your words have uplifted my heart and reminded me of my love for God. 
 yes one god..people believe from child hood the religion names,all about the same things.be good to every one help who you can help be faithful no matter what be good it is contages you will catch it but you have to out it out there 
 Seeing all the hateful posts on Facebook, it would serve many of us right if we were to discover that Islam turned out to be the correct religion. 
 Haha! If there is such a thing as “the correct religion  . . . . Anyway, thanks for stopping by, and for your comment. 
 well everytime I read what people call a correct religion..such as what post says..(all loving) if you close your eyes or just read it in this light.. its always simply describing a MOTHER’S love! (Bible says I would dandle you on my knee as a mother.. as a mother hen gather you.. feed you from my breasts etc) and islam.. says women are to be treated a certain way through men! never addressing her directly.. and also allah admits in quran that he “has no consort  his “behavior  is much more like a jilted lover/male than a mother’s love……he also says “far be it from allah to have a son  so he also says “I am NOTHING like Mary  “I am NOTHING LIKE a mother!  far be it! he says.. yet he controls human affairs..having no wife and no son.. strange to follow a being with neither experience!!! very strange! he goes out of his way to be explicit in saying.. “far be it from me to do such a thing  so why cant he understand? I can understand a GOD not giving birth or marrying!!! he would STILL be able to understand his creation!!??? he doesn’t seem to be the creator because he threatens the people with “turning them into pigs and monkeys  or walking around naked “again  not loving 
 Thanks for stopping by, and for your heartfelt comment. I have come to believe that the common identification of God as male is simply another example of our seeing God through the eyes of our own particular cultural heritage and perspective. Throughout much of earth’s history, men have been seen as primary, and women as secondary in human society. And since God is considered the all-powerful being, of course God is seen as being of the dominant sex. 
 But in reality, both male and female are expressions of the nature of God. Since God is the creator of all things, it could be no other way. If you would like to explore this further, here are some articles on this site that I recommend to your reading: 
 This helped me a lot going near to god, all of this we need faith for our spiritual life in any path we took. . . Now a days we are fighting about religions God doesn,t likes it 
 Relationship with God doesn’t sound like it can be found through any and all religions. In fact, religion is the biggest roadblock to seeking a relationship with God. Most religions look to be based upon this “works theology  (“If I can do enough, say enough, pray enough, give enough, sacrifice enough perhaps God will show me favor or send me to Heaven. ) 
 Religions contradict each other; therefore, they cannot all be true. (If truth is relative, then the statement that truth is relative is an absolute truth and would be a self-defeating statement by proving that truth is not relative. But, if truth is absolute, then the statement “truth is absolute  is true and not self-defeating. It is true that truth exists. It is true that truth will not contradict itself.) Mormonism teaches that there are many gods in existence, and that you can become a god. Christianity teaches that there is only one God, and you cannot become a god. Islam teaches that Jesus is not God in flesh, where Christianity does. Jesus cannot be both God and not God at the same time. Some religions teach that we reincarnate, while others do not. Some teach there is a hell, and others do not. They cannot all be true. If they cannot all be true, it cannot be true that all religions lead to God. Furthermore, it means that some religions are, at the very least, false in their claims to reveal the true God (or gods). 
 Your words: “…don’t you think God would do a good job of providing religion for the people on earth? Don’t you think God would provide a way for all people to experience God’s love and wisdom?  
 Er, yes. If one God exists, and he happens to be an all-knowing, 100% wise, truthful, all-powerful God, absolutely. If God has not done so, he’s certainly not an all-powerful, omnipresent, perfect God – and I wouldn’t be interested in a ‘less-than’ god, for I’d certainly be putting baseless stock in a puny god. 
 The bible itself says that the Christian faith would be a lie, and useless in the following case: “…And if Christ has not been raised, then all our preaching is useless, and your faith is useless. And we apostles would all be lying about God—for we have said that God raised Christ from the grave. But that can’t be true if there is no resurrection of the dead. And if there is no resurrection of the dead, then Christ has not been raised. And if Christ has not been raised, then your faith is useless and you are still guilty of your sins. In that case, all who have died believing in Christ are lost! And if our hope in Christ is only for this life, we are more to be pitied than anyone in the world.  (1 Corinthians 15:14-19) 
 Instead it makes the claims: “This is what the Lord says… the Lord Almighty: I am the first and I am the last; apart from me there is no God.  (Isaiah 44:6) The Bible insists there is only one God, and that all other gods are substitutes (Isaiah 44:9-20 – ‘worthless (44:9)’; ‘man-made (44:9-11)’; ‘detestable (44:19)’; illogical (44:19)’; ‘powerless (44:20)’, etc.) 
 By its own claims, the bible tells you that the Christian faith MUST either be a lie, or it is the only faith that can be true. 
 Your words: “…although God says the same thing to all people everywhere, each one of us hears it differently according to…  
 This is how the bible (Romans 1:20-26 ) explains how people have chosen to hear God: “For ever since the world was created, people have seen the earth and sky. Through everything God made, they can clearly see his invisible qualities—his eternal power and divine nature. So they have no excuse for not knowing God. Yes, they knew God, but they wouldn’t worship him as God or even give him thanks. And they began to think up foolish ideas of what God was like. As a result, their minds became dark and confused. Claiming to be wise, they instead became utter fools. And instead of worshiping the glorious, ever-living God, they worshiped idols made to look like mere people and birds and animals and reptiles. So God abandoned them to do whatever shameful things their hearts desired…They traded the truth about God for a lie. So they worshiped and served the things God created instead of the Creator himself….  
 Thank you for letting me take up so much space here 😉 
 Thanks for stopping by, and for your thoughtful comment! There are a lot of issues to cover here. I’ll respond more substantively after I’ve had a chance to mull it over a bit. 
 1. Pay attention to the exact words, not passing over or adding anything to the text. 2. Put particular verses and statements in the context of the story in which they are embedded, and of related statements elsewhere in the Bible. 
 With that in mind, let’s take a closer look at exactly what the Bible says . . . and what it doesn’t say. 
 The issue of a “works theology  is such a huge topic and there is so much misunderstanding about it that I’ll wait on that one until I can devote an entire blog post to the faith vs. works controversy. 
 Meanwhile, I’ll respond piece by piece to the other issues you raise. They all have to do with the truth or falsity of Christianity vs. other religions, and with the true God vs. false gods. 
 First, a word about absolute truth vs. relative truth. 
 There is absolute truth. To borrow and adapt words from John 1:1, absolute truth is with God, and it is God. 
 There is also relative truth. Relative truth is with and in everything else but God. 
 We humans, with our finite, limited minds, could no more grasp and comprehend the absolute truth as it exists in the core of God than we could grasp the full reality of God without being destroyed in the process. It is simply too powerful and too brilliant to fit into anything but the infinite mind of God. (See the article, “How does Jesus Appear to Us? Can We See God Face to Face?“) 
 In other words, all the truth that we humans have is relative. But it is relative to the absolute truth that God has and is. This means that we humans can be closer to or farther away from the absolute truth that is God, but we can never rightly claim to actually have the absolute truth. That glory belongs to God alone. It is sinful pride and a lack of humility before God for any human being to claim to have the absolute truth. Those who do so are stealing God’s glory. 
 Does this mean that there is no right or wrong? Not at all. Some things are contrary to the truth. 
 But let’s not get tangled up in human syllogisms about absolute truth vs. relative truth as if we humans could ever claim to be absolutely right. Being absolutely right is God’s job, not ours. 
 This statement of Paul is in the context of a discussion of resurrection from the dead. Paul’s main point is that if Christ’s resurrection from the dead did not happen, then Christianity is a lie, and the things that he is preaching and that his Christian listeners are believing in are a lie. 
 I’m a Christian, and I agree with him. If the resurrection of Christ is a false teaching, then Christianity as a whole is based on a falsehood. For one thing, Christ’s resurrection is one of the major demonstrations that Jesus Christ was not a mere finite human being like other human beings, but was, in fact “God with us  (Matthew 1:23). 
 However, saying that Christianity teaches the truth on this subject is not the same thing as saying that all other religions are false. And Paul does not say that all other religions besides Christianity are false. He says, rather, that Christianity is true. 
 About the most we can say is that Paul teaches that Christianity possesses a greater truth than the other religions that existed at the time. 
 However, possessing a greater truth does not make all other beliefs false. It simply makes them a lesser form of truth. As presented in the New Testament, the truth of Christianity does not make all other religions false. Rather, it presents Christianity as offering a greater truth than what the previous religions offered. 
 To put it in plain terms, the New Testament teaches that other religions besides Christianity still work. (See, for example, Romans 2:1-16.) But it teaches that Christianity works better. 
 Obviously, people of other religions will still object to this. They will not believe that Christianity has a greater truth than their own religion. But the main point here is that saying that Christianity is true as Paul does in 1 Corinthians 15:14-19 is not the same thing as saying that all other religions are false. And true Christianity as presented in the Bible extends salvation to people of other religions as well as to Christians. 
 Please keep in mind that the whole passage (not to mention Paul’s letters as a whole) is directed at Christians. When Paul says, “If Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile, and you are still in your sins,  he is talking to people who have put their faith in Jesus Christ. Clearly, if Jesus Christ is a false god, then those who believe in Jesus Christ are believing and hoping in a falsity. 
 Paul is not saying that the faith of all non-Christians is futile if Christ was not raised from the dead. Only that the faith of Christians is futile if Christ was not raised from the dead. (There is also a sense in which even the faith of non-Christians would be futile, which is presented in the article, “Who is God? Who is Jesus Christ? What about that Holy Spirit?  
 It may seem like a fine point, but if we read Paul’s statements in 1 Corinthians 15 carefully, not adding anything to the text, he simply does not say that all who don’t believe in Jesus Christ are believing and hoping in a falsity. I happen to believe that non-Christians are missing a beautiful and powerful element of God. However, if they believe in God and love God, it is still God that they love and believe in, even if they do not believe in the specific expression of God in Jesus Christ. 
 If it were not possible to believe in God without believing in Jesus Christ, then all of the good people who believed in God before Jesus Christ was born would be believing in a false god, and would be in hell as a result. If it were not possible to believe in God without believing in Jesus Christ, then the great figures of the Old Testament—Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, and so on—would all be in hell because they believed in a false god. 
 But as your next set of Bible references show, the Bible does not teach that believing in God without believing in Jesus Christ is believing in a false god. 
 It is simply not true, and it is not the teaching of the Bible, that if Christianity is true, then all other religions must be false. Even if Christianity possesses a greater truth as the New Testament teaches, other religions still possess and teach a great deal of truth. And though the New Testament does offer salvation through Jesus Christ, it also teaches that people of other religions can be saved even if they don’t believe in Jesus Christ. (Once again, see, for example, Romans 2:1-16.) 
 I am aware that this is contrary to the teachings of most of the Christian churches up to this day. But what’s important is not what the Christian churches teach. What’s important is what the Bible teaches. And this is what the Bible teaches. 
 This also means that no religion is absolutely true. 
 Yes, religion can be an obstacle to God, because religion is a human institution. This doesn’t mean the various religions are wrong or bad. It means that each religion embodies God’s love and truth as adapted to the particular human beings who follow that particular religion. And since we humans cannot grasp or handle the absolute love and truth that is God, it must always be veiled and adapted to our level of comprehension and of love. That’s why we have various religions. 
 That’s also why the various religions have teachings that conflict with one another. Different people see things differently, and God has to speak to us according to the way we see things. Otherwise we would reject God altogether. 
 However, let’s not forget that the various religions of the world also have many points of agreement. 
 That’s why it simply doesn’t work and isn’t true to say that Christianity is right and all other religions are wrong. What about the teachings of other religions that are the same as the teachings of Christianity? If all those other religions were wrong, wrong, wrong, it would mean that Christianity is also wrong in the areas where those other religions agree with it. 
 For example, in Islam, there is a tradition that there are 99 names of Allah. These names describe various attributes of God. Among them are “The Compassionate,  “The Merciful,  “The King,  “The Almighty,  “The Creator,  “The Omniscient,  “The Loving.  If you read down the whole list, nearly all, if not all of the names of God in Islam describe characteristics of God that are also found in the Bible and in Christianity. If Islam were completely wrong about God, this would mean that most of the things Christianity believes about God are also wrong. 
 People of various religions tend to emphasize the beliefs they hold to that are different from the beliefs of other religions. That’s how we humans distinguish ourselves from others and maintain our sense of distinct individual, community, cultural, and national character. But the fact is, on most of the practical fundamentals of religion, the various religions of the world agree with one another. 
 What are the fundamentals of religion? 
 Jesus himself told us when he answered the question put to him by the Sadducees and Pharisees, “Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?  
 Jesus responded, “‘You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind.’ This is the greatest and first commandment. And a second is like it: ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’ On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets  (see Matthew 22:34-40). 
 I suspect that there are very few religions in the world that would disagree with the two Great Commandments that Jesus says are the most important teachings in the Bible. And don’t forget that he was quoting these two commandments from the Hebrew (Jewish) Scriptures. 
 In other words, though the various religions of the world do have many different and even conflicting teachings about God, spirit, salvation, the afterlife, and so on, when it comes to the practical fundamentals of how to actually live our religion as taught by Jesus, all of the major religions are in agreement: The most important thing is to love God above all, and love our neighbor as we love ourselves. 
 If we all just loved one another and didn’t have to put energy into what religion is right the world would be doing a lot better if we put money aside for the poor instead of putting into founding churches the world would be better religion is a waste, being a good person and helping people around you makes a difference going to the same building every Sunday and praying and worshiping somthing your not 100 percent sure is real is a waste of time an energy be good and worship the world your in not a spiritual world you aren’t even completely sure is there 
 In my view, if a church isn’t teaching and inspiring its people to help and serve the people around them, then it’s not doing its job, and it shouldn’t be wasting the patch of ground that it’s built on. For more on this, see: What Does Religion Have to Do with My Profession and My Daily Work? 
 paragraph 6 first line: correction: there are 99 names of Allah. what i have been told once for Islam is: “god  is not a translation for “Allah . sorry to waste your time if you already know this. 
 Thanks for stopping by, and for your comment and correction. I’ve made the fix to my comment. 
 Thus says the Lord, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer, the Lord of hosts: I am the first and I am the last; besides me there is no god. 
 This was the God that the ancient Jewish people worshiped. When God made this statement through the prophet Isaiah, Jesus Christ had not even been born. And yet, the God of the universe was still present and available to all people on earth to be loved and worshiped. 
 I believe that Jesus Christ is the fullest expression of God that can be known to humankind. But even those who do not know or believe in Jesus Christ can still know God, just as those who believed in God before Jesus Christ was born could know and believe in God. 
 The incarnation of God as Jesus Christ does not take God away from all the other religions of the world. Rather, it adds a new and more personal presence of God for those who are willing and able to accept it. 
 The rest of your references to Isaiah 44 are from a sequence on the absurdity of idol worship. The full version is found in Isaiah 44:9-20. 
 This passage is not about people who worship the one God of the universe under various names, as do people of many religions around the world. It is about the futility and absurdity of human beings making gods out of wood, metal, and stone, and then bowing down and worshiping them. It is idols that are pronounced “‘worthless (44:9)’; ‘man-made (44:9-11)’; ‘detestable (44:19)’; illogical (44:19)’; ‘powerless (44:20)’, etc.  
 In the Bible itself, there are people of other nations who worship the Most High God. For example, Moses’ father-in-law, Jethro, was a Midianite (descendants of Abraham through his wife Keturah, whom he married after Sarah died). Jethro was a priest in Midian, and offered sacrifices to God with Moses, Aaron, and the elders of Israel (see Exodus 18:1-12). 
 However, to get the full impact of what Paul is saying here, it’s necessary to read the whole sequence: Romans 1:18-32. 
 In particular, Romans 1:18 reads: 
 For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and wickedness of those who by their wickedness suppress the truth. (emphasis added) 
 Romans 1:18-32 is not talking about good people of other religions besides Christianity. It is talking about evil people who have been taught about God, but who reject God because they are evil. Such people are unwilling to accept God’s sovereignty over their lives because God tells them not to engage in the evil and destructive behaviors that they wish to engage in. As a result, they substitute false, man-made images and idols for the true God of the universe. 
 Now, if you believe that all people of all other religions besides Christianity are evil, there’s not much I can say to you except that I respectfully disagree. I have experienced for myself wonderful, kind, loving, and thoughtful people who are Jewish, Muslim, Hindu, Buddhist, and of various other religions. These people believe in God and love God. They have devoted their lives to following the teachings of God as they understand them, and to living a life of love, compassion, and service toward their fellow human beings. They are following the two Great Commandments given by Jesus. 
 These are not the people Paul is talking about in Romans 1:18-32. They are not people who “by their wickedness suppress the truth  (Romans 1:18). They are the ones Paul is talking about in Romans 2:14-15: 
 When Gentiles, who do not possess the law, do instinctively what the law requires, these, though not having the law, are a law to themselves. They show that what the law requires is written on their hearts, to which their own conscience also bears witness. 
 And a few verses earlier: 
 For he [God] will repay according to each one’s deeds: to those who by patiently doing good seek for glory and honor and immortality, he will give eternal life; while for those who are self-seeking and who obey not the truth but wickedness, there will be wrath and fury. There will be anguish and distress for everyone who does evil, the Jew first and also the Greek, but glory and honor and peace for everyone who does good, the Jew first and also the Greek. For God shows no partiality. (Romans 2:6-11) 
 As Paul says, God shows no partiality. Christian, Jew, or Greek (which basically meant “pagan ), God will “repay according to each one’s deeds.  Those who are wicked and self-seeking will experience wrath and fury, while those who do good will experience the glory, honor, and peace of eternal life. 
 This is the teaching of the Bible. 
 The Bible does not teach that all non-Christians are evil and will go to hell. 
 Rather, the Bible teaches that Christians are saved by believing in Jesus Christ and living by his teachings, Jews are saved by believing in God and living according to the teachings of the Law, and “Gentiles  (or “Greeks ) are saved by “doing instinctively what the law requires,  and by living good lives according to their conscience. 
 I am aware that there are other passages in the Bible that are interpreted as meaning that all who do not believe in Jesus Christ are evil and will be damned to hell. But Romans 2 is in the Bible for a reason. And I believe it is put right near the beginning of all of Paul’s letters in the Bible for a reason. It is there to teach us that if we are interpreting the Bible as saying that all non-Christians will go to hell, then our interpretation is mistaken and false. In Romans 2 Paul lays out clearly how people of other religions besides Christianity are saved. And he does this before making his famous statements about being saved through faith in Jesus Christ. 
 Unfortunately, most of the Christian churches and Christian leaders have largely ignored Romans 2, and skipped right to the last part of Romans 3. As a result, they have misinterpreted the rest of what Paul said in his letters, and have hatched false doctrines about all non-Christians being evil and going to hell, which the Bible does not teach. 
 My personal experiences and beliefs, why don’t we build temples, mandir’s, churches, mosque in one plot, who believes in their religion will go to their temples or churches etc,,, but a single Godly soul who believes there is one God,will go to all temples of beliefs and respect every religion, my truth of Who God really is !!!! No pride of religion, not what the bible said, the Gita said or what Quaran said etc,,, this is his playground called earth , his creation, just purely serve mankind cause True God is in every soul of the body ♥♡♥♡♥ 
 Thanks for your beautiful thoughts! I think you and I are of the same mind and spirit on this. 
 No human being is perfect and sinless. But I try my best to lead a life to the utmost liking of “ God  . If there is a so-called heaven I definitely be placed in there according to the life that I have lead, If not still I have nothing to worry about because I have lead a harmless life. 
 Thanks for stopping by, and for your comment. Godspeed on your spiritual journey! 
 Sure you say that there is a god in your article ( whIch is interesting ) but how do you even know there is a god because faith can only go so far 
 That’s a big question! For one response to it, focusing more on the reality of spirit than the reality of God (but the two are closely linked), please see this article: Where is the Proof of the Afterlife? 
 Marissa – this is beautiful! Thank you! Either Jesus is or is not who He said He was. If He is not who he said was … then 100% he was a crazy man or a liar – or – both ( C.S. Lewis). Jesus cannot be fully human and fully God while at the same time not being fully God, as you stated. It cannot be. Either one believes this or not. There is a truth … you spelled it out beautifully. Thank you. 
 What you state is true: Other religions may contain and teach elements of the truth about God, and those things stay true, whether they’re in one religion or a different one. You rightfully say: ‘Some things are contrary to the truth.’ Indeed. A serious consideration regards those who would reject any truth of God, once confronted with it, or as you put it, those who would reject ‘more’ truth as it’s presented to them. The deceptive thing about religions is that they teach some truth alongside things that are contrary to truth (we can call this a ‘lie’), which, for our human, finite minds, sets people up to become confused on how to discern truth from those things that are not just erroneous to truth, but contrary to it. So that, thus, once confronted with more truth, they may reject it, and if so, leads to not worshipping God ‘in spirit and in truth’ (John 4:24). 
 There’s a reason why God includes in the bible “‘…his worshipers must worship Him in Spirit and in truth.  You’re correct in that many who lived and died before Christ came could have certainly gone to God because of the faith that they did have in him – with the truth that He had given them at the time, of course. But if He has since given more truth (for He knows we don’t grasp all truth at once), the rejection of Christ, for example, would cause any rejector to have made the choice to cut off relationship with the true God (‘they exchanged the truth for a lie’ – Romans 1:25). The ‘contrary truth’ within any religion, once accepted over the truth that God reveals more of, causes a person to then choose to worship an imaginary god of their own making – a god who is not God. 
 But just as in my own search for truth, encountering and once having been open to various religions who taught something about God, God has always been powerful enough to give practicers of religions truth different from what their religions teach them. At those times God proves who is truly willing to worship Him ‘in truth’. Thus, those to whom God speaks of and reveals more truth, or for those who reject Christ once presented with the knowledge of who He is (as did many described in the bible), well… 
 Thanks again for the time you’ve taken to respond – I sincerely appreciate your repetition on not adding to nor taking away from the bible. It reminds me of this verse stated in the bible, which I have a reverent fear of (1 Corinthians 10:32-33): “Do not cause anyone to stumble, whether Jews, Greeks or the church of God— even as I try to please everyone in every way. For I am not seeking my own good but the good of many, so that they may be saved.  Which then leads to what is required to be ‘saved’… 😉 (John 3:16-18, etc.) 
 It’s helpful to make a distinction between the head and the hands when considering whether someone has “rejected Jesus Christ.  Believing intellectually in Jesus Christ does not save a person. But actively believing by living according to what Jesus Christ taught does. That’s why Jesus said, “Not everyone who says to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter the kingdom of heaven, but only those who do the will of my Father in heaven  (Matthew 7:21). 
 For what the Lord himself taught about who will be saved and who will be damned, please read Matthew 25:31-46: 
 “When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, he will sit on his glorious throne. All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate the people one from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. He will put the sheep on his right and the goats on his left. 
 “Then the King will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father; take your inheritance, the kingdom prepared for you since the creation of the world. For I was hungry and you gave me something to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink, I was a stranger and you invited me in, I needed clothes and you clothed me, I was sick and you looked after me, I was in prison and you came to visit me.’ 
 “Then the righteous will answer him, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink? When did we see you a stranger and invite you in, or needing clothes and clothe you? When did we see you sick or in prison and go to visit you?’ 
 “The King will reply, ‘Truly I tell you, whatever you did for one of the least of these brothers and sisters of mine, you did for me.’ 
 “Then he will say to those on his left, ‘Depart from me, you who are cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was hungry and you gave me nothing to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink, I was a stranger and you did not invite me in, I needed clothes and you did not clothe me, I was sick and in prison and you did not look after me.’ 
 “They also will answer, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or needing clothes or sick or in prison, and did not help you?’ 
 “He will reply, ‘Truly I tell you, whatever you did not do for one of the least of these, you did not do for me.’ 
 “Then they will go away to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life.  
 There is no mention here of belief. Only of loving God by loving our fellow human beings. We show by our actions what we truly believe. All who live according to the teachings of Jesus Christ, even if they do not believe in Jesus intellectually, are believing in Jesus with their hearts and their hands. 
 I just stumbled upon your post, simply searching to see if anyone had the same views as myself. As a young boy, (being raised Christian) I remember asking my father this same question. How do I know Christianity is the right religion? Cuz I wanted to make sure I go to heaven too! His answer was different from my beliefs today. “Because Christianity is the one and only true religion and I have nothing to worry about as long as I believe in Jesus Christ, and that he died on the cross for our sins.  Even as a young boy, I was not satisfied with this answer, for I was raised a Christian, just as Buddhist, Hindu, Jewish, Muslim, etc. children are all over the world. It didnt seem fair that a little Buddhist boy half way across the globe doesn’t get the same chance to go to heaven because he was raised under a “wrong  religion? This bothered me and made me question my religion. “What if my religion is wrong?  Because I’m sure all religions claim that theirs is the “right  religion.  This left many questions unanswered and just more confusion for a very long time!  Only years later, and learning and researching other religions did I have the “eureka!  Moment! Much of exactly like you described here in your post! I learned that while there are many religions and viewpoints, they all ironically tend to lead to the same generalized beliefs! Often many of the stories coincide if you look at it as “the big picture of all religions  they just might say it in a different way. I’ve came to the conclusion that certain differences and beliefs are just a matter of human interpretation. Religion is a human creation, god however is not. The way one person to the next may see the same thing very differently. But in the end, they still saw the same thing. In this case the big picture of all religions. I do not believe any one single religion is completely right or completely wrong. That religion should not be over analyzed and picked apart word for word. The “big picture  of all religions involves a god, or gods, loving their god or gods and living a life of loving one another, being a genuine good person, loving our fellow brothers and sisters, being caring, thoughtful, doing good deeds and making the right choices. This is the basis for all religions, and I am at peace that even though I don’t necessarily affiliate with a particular religion, I do believe in a higher power of some sort, and that by living my life in the way described in many religions as “living for god  that I too will have my place in heaven along with all the Christians, Jews, Muslims, Hindus, Buddhists, and so on! I am a very peaceful person and love all human beings from all walks of life and religions. I’ve also learned from my own experiences, that having soo many different types of religions creates segregation and discrimination between religions. Much like racial discrimination. If someone thinks that their religion is the “right  religion and everyone else’s is wrong. This inferior complex often leads to hate towards others of different beliefs and religions. Not saying that everyone in a particular religion hates or doesn’t love others from other religions, but this is a very common aspect in many religions which has often caused conflict, hate, and even wars in the past, present and future to come. Perhaps the world would be a more loving peaceful place if more people had the same viewpoints that you and I share. Peace and love to all men and women of all religions! 
 Is there an actual name to this sort of belief that all religions will lead to god in their own way? These are my true beliefs, so when asked about my religion from others, is there a word for it? Or do I have to go into the whole explanation of my beliefs? Thank you sooo much again! 
 Jason, not sure is this message will get to you being that it’s years later… I was looking for a “word  to describe it myself for over a year while in college. I have settled on Omnism or being called an Omnist (this word being derived from omni meaning “all  is the opposite of dogmatic because it means to have an open mind about spirituality and religion) . If you still feel this way, I’d recommend looking into it. 
 After traveling the world a bit, meeting all kinds of people and accepting others and their right to believe I could no longer just consider myself to be a Christian strictly due to the fact that that’s the religion that my family taught me (because of course they believe- and they want me to have what they believe is best for me) and their expectations. But Omnism is defined recognising all religions and having an equal amount of respect for all religions ( by pretty much believing that they all hold some truth or at least some lesson we can learn from). It’s not a religion in itself, just a way to more accurately describe a way of thinking, therefore; someone can be a Christian-Omnist or what have you. Although this way of thinking, as well as the term it’s self, is not new it’s just been more recently popularized. With this term, I have found my peace and I just wanted to share it in the case that you find it useful 🙂 
 I hope you also find this information useful Lee! Great article. I appreciate you taking the time to thoroughly explain your position to everyone who asks as well. You are very open and respectful, even when others are not. For that, you have earned my respect. I wish people would learn how to agree to disagree so thay we can peacefully all just be. 
 I had not come across the word Omnism before, so I’ve now added it to my vocabulary. We’ll probably see more of it in the coming decades. 
 DesJaVae, I disagree that someone could be a Christian-Omnist, or any ‘religion’-omnist. By saying you believe all to be right, when they say different things, does not make sense. If you are a Muslim (following the Quran), you believe a particular group of things, many will contradict with what you believe if you are Christian (following the Bible), for example; they say completely opposite things in places. To say you believe all are right, when all say something different, doesn’t make logical sense to me. And you cannot believe what a Muslim believes and believe all are correct, nor a Buddhist and believe all are correct, nor a Christian, etc etc and believe all to be correct. When they all say something different. What people believe will always overlap somewhere, but it is what is different about what people believe that sets Christianity and the religions apart from one another. They are certainly not the same. Personally, I am a Christian, and you cannot believe what the bible says and at the same time concluded that all religions out there are true, because, to do so, you would have to then claim to not believe what Christianity teaches (what Jesus taught). So calling yourself a Christian-Omnist makes no sense to me. It gives people the impression that you can be a christian and believe anything you like; and this is not true; to be a Christian, is to believe certain things (else I’d be something else, wouldn’t I, if I believed what a Muslim believed, I’d call myself a Muslim. I couldn’t be a Muslim who believed what the Bible said, because that would make me a Christian and not a Muslim. I cannot be a Muslim and a Christian and the same time). Can I ask why you have personally attached ‘Christian’ before the ‘Omnist’ part when describing yourself? Why not Muslim-omnist, or Buddhist-Omnist? Or Athetist-Omnist (if such a thing could exist). You have perplexed me. 🙂 many thanks x God bless you x 
 I would simply respond that Jesus’ own teaching of what sets a person apart as one of his disciples (which today we call “Christians ) was not about belief at all, but about love for the neighbor. Here it is: 
 I give you a new commandment, that you love one another. Just as I have loved you, you also should love one another. By this everyone will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another. (John 13:34-35, italics added) 
 Here Jesus teaches us that anyone who has love for one another is among his disciples. That, according to Jesus Christ himself, is how we can know that someone is a follower of Jesus. 
 The apostle John echoes this teaching of Jesus when he says: 
 Whoever does not love does not know God, for God is love. (1 John 4:8) 
 Hello, Sorry to butt into the discussion but don’t you think all religions are a pathway to God? Plus in a way if there are some contradictions in e.g. the Bible and the Quran I’m sure there are some parts that compliment each other? Kind regards! 
 Omnism is the closest thing I know of, which is the respect of all religions. It can go even deeper, into fideism, but I don’t agree that faith is the ultimate truth — because truth is based on fact and faith is not fact. 
 Thanks for your long and thoughtful comment. It’s always good to make a connection with kindred spirits! I enjoyed, and agree with, your thoughts. 
 As you’ll see if you spend some time with the various posts here, Annette and I are Christians. However, we don’t think Christianity has an exclusive on God. In our view, those Christians who think their own religion is the only way to be “saved  have misunderstood the teachings of the New Testament. A lot of our time and effort here on Spiritual Insights for Everyday Life is to present a broader and deeper view of Christianity–one that affirms the goodness of other religions while also highlighting the finer points of true Christianity. 
 In general, the more fundamentalist wings of every religion tend to be exclusive and combative about their religion, the moderate wings tend to be middle-of-the-road and more accepting of people of other religions, and the mystical wings tend to see God as equally present in all the religions of the world. 
 One classic formulation of the commonalities on the mystical end of all religions was published in 1945 by Aldous Huxley: The Perennial Philosophy. You don’t have to agree with all of Huxley’s viewpoints to appreciate the broadness of his vision. 
 Good question about whether there’s a specific word for the belief that all religions lead to God in their own way. In my own tradition there is a phrase covering it: “The Universal Church –which includes all people everywhere who believe in God in some form, and who live lives of love and service toward their fellow human beings. This draws on Jesus’ own statement of the fundamentals of real religion: “You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your strength, and with all your mind; and your neighbor as yourself  (Luke 10:27). 
 As for whether there’s a name in more widespread use to describe this belief, I’ll have to think about that. 
 Meanwhile, explaining your beliefs to people is not a bad thing! 😉 
 Thank you lee for your response, and shedding some more light on the subject. I appreciate you taking the time to respond to my comment in great detail. It’s such a good feeling to be able to converse with others who share my same viewpoints on religion. You have a very good insight on your beliefs, along with a very good knowledge to back up what you say. So many people will say something regarding religion, and when asked why? Their answer is “because that’s what the bible says , yet ask them to quote or even tell you the general area of the bible that they claim says something, and they have no clue. I’ve had many debates about religion with other “Christians  including my own parents, and these are the answers I get all the time. “The bible says so!  Or “it’s what god says or wants  it’s very frustrating, because they will argue with you till they are blue in the face, that they are right, and You am dead wrong for not agreeing with them. My parents don’t like the fact that I don’t believe in what the bible says the way they believe. I guess religion is one if those things such as politics, it’s just a very touchy subject that people have such strong views and beliefs, that they simply cannot hear anything that doesn’t go along with what they believe, because they are simply right, and anyone else’s are simply wrong. They have no problems condemning and judging others for their beliefs or lifestyle, sexuality, etc… And many go to extremes of telling someone that they are bad people, are going to go to hell, or even say that god hates them. Ironically going against everything that they claim to be as religious, loving, godly people! It just blows my mind how naive and hateful people can be, and argue, it’s not their word, it’s Gods word. From what I gathered from the bible basics is that god is a very loving, caring person. I just wonder how happy god will be with those who put false hateful words in gods mouth, when they come to meet their own judgement day. I believe in being the best person I can be, i don’t judge, hate or treat others any differently because they are of a different race, religion, or sexuality. I truly love thy neighbor for the way that god created them. I don’t consider myself any better than anyone, or any worse, we are all human beings, brothers and sisters. Perhaps if more people lived their lives that way, the world would be a more loving and peaceful place. 
 Yes, people do get very sensitive, and sometimes very defensive, about their religion. People’s religion is very important to them, and they hold it close to their heart. When their beliefs are questioned or challenged, it can feel very personal to them. 
 It is also very common for people who have adopted a new set of beliefs that they find very exciting to want to tell everyone about it–only to find a solid wall of resistance and rejection from almost everyone they talk to. Sad to say, it is sometimes necessary to seek out and find a whole new circle of friends who share similar views, or at least are more open-minded and interested in different perspectives. 
 When discussing and debating religion with others, keep in mind that people stick with one set of beliefs or another because they need those beliefs to keep themselves on track spiritually. Even if their beliefs may seem very wrong to you, you’ll most likely be fighting a losing battle if your goal is to try to get them to change their mind. 
 It’s especially hard when people take intolerant positions toward various groups of people based on their religious beliefs. And it’s easy to fall into the trap of being intolerant of intolerant people! 😉 It is a spiritual exercise in itself to treat people with tolerance and respect even if they don’t show the same consideration for others. 
 Speaking of intolerant views people adopt based on their view of the Bible, you might enjoy this post: What is the Sin of Sodom? 
 I was touched because I, myself is very defensive when someone overrides my belief. Until one time, I got doubt of mine. I am now very excited to behave and openly accept different views of religion. It has just so very complicated until I have eated all bites of this article. 
 Thank you for your beautiful comment. It gives me joy to know that this article has provided some delicious and eye-opening spiritual food for you. I love believing in a God who loves people of all religions. This is a belief that helps us to love one another even though we may be very different from one another. 
 Hi, I came across your comments, when I googled   How do I know if Christianity is the right religion . I do have to say Lee, everything you wrote on this page makes complete and absolute sense to me. Its crazy to think that I was lead to this page, to open my eyes a little wider. So thank-you….very very very helpful! May God bless you. Jill 
 Thanks for your kind words. I am glad you were led to this page, and that my words brought you a little more light. Blessings on your spiritual journeys! 
 Thanks so much posting this. I consider myself on the agnostic side, but am deeply interested in all religions. Growing up in the U.S, I was raised with a Christian attitude but was a person who traveled and read a lot, thus was curious of other religions. I have come to believe and find similarities in many different religions, and have been told countless times by fellow Christians that I am NOT allowed to believe in anything but Jesus Christ and that he ONLY exists in the bible, but I just don’t see it that way. I see his teachings everywhere, but the cruelty I hear has made me doubtful of ALL my beliefs and frightened of damnation. I want to find god everywhere in the world and love him, not follow him through fear. This post really brightened my day and helped me feel gods love again. 
 Thanks for your thoughts. It is unfortunate that many Christians have gone for a rather black-and-white, fear-based version of Christianity. This is not the Christianity that I see taught by Jesus Christ in the Gospels, nor by the early Christians who wrote the Acts and the Epistles. 
 For a more faith- and love-based version of Christianity, I invite you to browse the various articles on this blog. If you have any questions, please feel free to submit a “spiritual conundrum.  
 There is nothing to fear from God. You are moving from darkness to light! 
 Wow, lots of comments on this one. From scripture, even Jesus acknowledged that those who did not know him could enter heaven. Here are the passages that I had found, before knowing about Emanuel Swedenborg: 
 1. Servants who did not know of their master were punished less than those who did know (Luke 12:48). So with more knowledge comes more responsibility. 2. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were already in heaven before Christ (Matt. 22:32, Luke 16:19-31) 3. Jesus had no problem with those who did not follow him and yet were able to cast out demons (Mark 9:38-41) 
 So to say just one religion saves is very narrow minded. The universal maxim: do the good by the truth that you know. All who do this will enter heaven. While everyone knows the truth through their conscience, Christianity knows that this same truth became incarnate in human form. Thus Jesus said “I am the truth.  So why Christianity? Why not a direct personal relationship with the One, instead of an abstract one? 
 I have a hundred questions for God, only if they can be all answered honestly I will feel so much better. But my questions are not normal questions, ok wait they are normal but nobody would dare to ask the questions I tend to ask people. So anyways back to the real topic, my thoughts on this subject are I believe that there is one God and he told men to find ways that they can keep their children and women safe. That’s were all the different religion come in to play. They (Religion) are written rules for safety. If there were none we would all be the same. There is ONE GOD. God Bless to all. 
 Thanks for your comment. Wouldn’t it be nice to have a direct pipeline to God? 
 I don’t . . . . However, if you have a question or two that you think others would be interested in as well, feel free to submit a “spiritual conundrum.  If it’s something I think I can help you understand, I’ll write and post an article here about it. 
 I do agree with you that when we follow the rules given by our religion–especially when we actually care about God and other people–this world is a much safer place than when we don’t. 
 I am enjoying reading here – I could go into a whole long conversation but won’t – only felt I needed to say SOMETHING for the amount of time I have just spent reading. I am kinda glad to have found your site – mulling it over a bit. 
 Thanks for stopping by, and for your good comments. I’m glad you’re finding these articles thought-provoking and helpful. I will give you a response on your longer comment, but it may take a little more time. You ask some great questions! 
 Generally, one God (which I believe) who is capable of allowing his only begotten son to be sacrificed for the benefit, salvation, of anyone whom will believe, would be capable of any other way to give people a chance to believe. Specifically however, please enlighten those of us who remain confused by reincarnation. As an example, Krishna conciousness teaches an absolutely beautiful and devoted life to God (whom appears in any way he chooses but still only ONE god). The bible seems to teach that we come through this human “life  but once. I understand that this could be once per each human life and I have considered that each human life, even reincarnated, is once. Please provide your take on this. Unless I have misunderstood, according to Krishna teachings, heaven is not the “final  or utmost attainment. Thank you for this forum and the ability to search for truth rather than search for ways to verify an opinion. 
 Hi again, just to clarify my question, it seems to me that anywhere our God is, that IS the final destination or highest attainment. And that Jesus walking the earth is an amazing proof of the love our God has for us. Jesus showed us exactly, by example, what a perfect human life is all about. Believe and act, love each other, love God the most. Wouldn’t it be nice if we could connect all the “religions  together instead of focusing on the differences and opinions and separating them? Then we’d have no “mine is right and yours is wrong , which is all man made. In the end, ALL whom believe and act and love each other all seek exactly the same attainment, which is everlasting life with our God. I am so interested in hearing your views regarding reincarnation. Thank you! May God bless you. 
 Thanks for your comments and questions. I’ve been mulling over how best to respond. I’ve decided that the issue of reincarnation is big enough that it will require its own post, which I hope to write some time within the next month. 
 Meanwhile, you’ve laid out the question very well. The Bible is fairly clear that we have one life on earth–and that is the belief of the major religions based on or related to the books accepted as Scripture in the West: Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Meanwhile the major Eastern religions, such as Hinduism and Buddhism, generally teach that we go through multiple lives on earth before moving on to a state of eternal union with God. 
 I do agree with you that the most important thing is not what particular religion we belong to or what particular doctrines we believe in, but whether we act on our beliefs by loving each other and loving God the most. So although I don’t believe that our individual spirits undergo reincarnation in the physical sense, I also don’t consider believing or not believing in reincarnation to be an essential issue for our spiritual life. 
 Still, there are many valid reasons people believe in reincarnation, and those reasons need to be taken into account in any response. Reincarnation is a major issue for many people. I hope you won’t mind checking back occasionally, or following the blog, until I’m able to do it justice in its own blog post. 
 Certainly I do not mind waiting while you consider this topic. I realize it is quite a task to tackle! As you say, reincarnation is a major issue for many people. Of all the “eastern religions , I personally consider Krishna Consiousness to be the most inclusive and informative of all “religions . The guru I studied with totally believed in Jesus and the bible and did a good job of providing information without even a hint of trying to “convince  me that one or the other was right, or better, or wrong. So, I learned a lot. Still, I found myself gravitating to Jesus… likely due to my existing relationship with Him. Besides, Jesus said, “…if you’ve seen me, you’ve seen the father.  How can it get better than that!? 
 Thanks for your patience. I have now written and posted a major (read: long) article on reincarnation: 
 I hope it answers your questions! Feel free to continue the conversation there if you have further thoughts, ideas, or questions on the subject of reincarnation. 
 Agreed! Even if people do group together to share common faiths, each one of us has our own pathway to God. 
 Specially as per mine small knowledge, i feel that  religion is just a good principle  to avoid people from doing unwanted actions, like killing, stealing, telling lies, even remaining away from unwanted practices, which directly harm our self, etc. 
 Thanks for stopping by. If religion influences people to avoid harmful and unwanted actions, that’s a good thing, isn’t it? 
 Hi, Just wanted to ask would you label yourself a Christian? I grew up being a Christian but have recently been uncomfortable with how so many people can be ignorant to other people’s belief. I really agree with what you said about even atheists would be living in God’s law if they live a good life too. Religion shouldn’t be forced onto someone whatever path someone wants to take should be enentirely up to them. I really like this article because I too believe that what’s most important is living a good life whether God is real or not but I just wish that people would accept that not everyone interprets messages the same as everyone’s belief makes us who we are. I think anyway 
 Yes, I am a Christian. My version of Christianity is probably quite different from what you grew up with, however. For more on that, see the article, “Christian Beliefs  that the Bible Doesn’t Teach. Or simply spend some time looking through Spiritual Insights for Everyday Life to find out more about how Annette and I view Christianity. 
 I do agree with your thoughts. We must be free to follow the spiritual beliefs and take the spiritual path that work best for us. If we live a good life according to our beliefs, showing love and kindness to other people and serving them in our own unique way, we are building a life of heaven for ourselves. We are living by the spirit of what Jesus Christ taught, even if we may not label ourselves Christians. 
 My own beliefs are strongly Christian. And as I have said in this and several other articles on the website, this means that I believe God is loving, merciful, and wise, and has provided a path toward heaven for everyone, everywhere, each according to their own character and culture. True Christianity is not just about beliefs. It is about loving God and loving our neighbor, as Jesus Christ taught. 
 Thank you for the time and effort you put into addressing reincarnation. I have tried to understand the thought process of it and still do not. Your study is thorough and I appreciate this very much because I want to understand as much as I can! I’m sorry though, I still do not understand a basis for believing in reincarnation. For me, in all my limited studies nothing compares to prayer. While in prayer I have a connection to reality and do not feel as “blinded  to spirituality. Without going into details, I receive gifts that would mean little to nothing to anyone else, but to me are meaningful and priceless and could not originate from anywhere else but the spiritual. Either than or I have a lot of irony in my life… and irony never crosses my mind at those times. I believe in God, and Jesus, and prayers are heard for those who believe. This is my path. 
 It sounds like you have a good and satisfying spiritual practice. 
 About reincarnation, do you not understand why people believe it, or why people don’t believe it? Or something else? 
 Thank you! Instead of just reading books I actually spent time with a “guru , to try to learn, and I came to understand that, to me, it was not idol worship and also it was one god, that was my understanding. But no matter how it was explained, even though I tried to understand, I just could not accept reincarnation. It is quite clear to me that trying to understand the entire spiritual realm (or whatever work fits your comfort level) in the human condition is at best, limited. For me however, it just doesn’t make sense. I don’t see the relevance nor the spiritual “gain . We have all the chances we need in this one life! 
 Thanks for taking the time to explain further. It sounds like you and I have come to similar conclusions, even if we arrived at them by a different route. 
 I completely agree with you that people who follow other religions are not engaging in idol worship. Their religion is just as real to them as ours is to us. Assuming they are genuine and sincere, they are truly following God as God appears to them. That’s what this article is all about! 🙂 And I think it’s great that you made the effort to learn from a living teacher rather than simply “hitting the books.  
 And about reincarnation, I, too, cannot accept it. Like you, I don’t see the spiritual gain in it. The further spiritual growth that it offers can take place far better and more completely in the spiritual world after we have built the “foundation  here in the material world. 
 Still, I don’t argue with those who hold firmly to a belief in reincarnation. I know it provides them with a sense of justice and meaning in life, even if I think that reincarnation is unnecessary and that there is greater meaning and justice without it. 
 Thanks again for your thoughtful comments! If you have any further thoughts to share or questions to ask, feel free to post them in a comment or to submit a Spiritual Conundrum. 
 This is a very interesting discussion, and one that I’m sure most people of faith have thought about at some point. Having travelled the world and experienced people from different religions in different settings, it is obvious that there are many who have found God through diverse paths. It is also true that religion is man made, however, when we examine the founders of each faith there are marked differences, and ones that could ultimately poison the well, so to speak. 
 Whilst I am certain that heaven will be filled with many from different faiths and cultures, because they followed Gods ways, there is only one being that claimed to be the way the truth and the life who actually lived his entire life worthy of that claim. There is another prophet, for example, who founded a different religion, who according to the accounts of his own devoted followers murdered those who wouldn’t follow his new religion. This is happening on a massive scale in the Middle East and Africa now because of his commands and because he is the perfect example, according to this religion. Does his example and teachings, which inform that religion, represent God’s will for mankind? 
 Ultimately, I find people who claim that truth is a movable feast according to perception are building their spiritual homes on shifting sand. Truth, counter to popular, fashionable, opinion, is often, if not always, black and white and can be answered by a simple question: 
 Does God exist…yes or no. Is god a clearly defined being who although perceived differently by men, is one consistent being…yes or no. Did Jesus, according to the accounts we possess, perfectly represent God? Yes or no? Now since we don’t exactly know God, we can’t be sure of this answer, but that doesn’t change the fact that there is a right or wrong answer to this question if God exists and he is a clearly definable being. Likewise, because of the huge differences between the life and teachings of Jesus and the life and teachings of Mohammad, for example, the religions that base themselves on these men are not the same and cannot equally represent God. 
 Thanks for your thoughtful comment. The basic point of this article is, to put it in your words, “that heaven will be filled with many from different faiths and cultures, because they followed Gods ways.  This is an idea that the fundamentalists of various religions–including Christianity–reject. I am glad that you and I agree on this point. It is vital to understanding God as a universally loving and just God 
 I also agree with you that truth is not   a movable feast according to perception.  However, we humans are a movable feast. The truth itself is eternal and does not change, because it is part of the being of God. We humans, though, perceive that truth in various ways. And though I do think we can have clearer and less clear perceptions of the truth, it would be hubris for any human being or religion to claim to have the absolute, pure truth. Only God has that, because God is truth. 
 If ten artists get together and paint the same scene, each painting will be distinctly different, even though they are painting the same scene. And each painting will express some unique human take on that scene. Further, every person who views each painting will also see something different in it. Religion is more like a painting than a snapshot. And each religion expresses to its followers some unique perspective on the eternal truth that is God. 
 About Christianity in comparison with other religions, I am a Christian, and there are many reasons for that. Foremost among them is that I believe that Jesus is, in the Bible’s words, “God with us  (Matthew 1:23). If I thought a different religion offered a better and clearer expression of God, I would join it. 
 However, to be fair, Christians have just as much blood on their hands historically as Muslims or people of any other faith. Even today, there are Christians slaughtering Muslims in various parts of the world. The U.S.–a predominantly Christian nation–is currently engaged in armed conflict with Muslims in the Middle East, and has killed vastly more Muslims in various Middle Eastern countries than the number of Americans who were killed by Muslims on 9/11. U.S. drones and U.S. soldiers on the ground are targeting Muslims every day. Recently, a report surfaced that the navy SEALS who killed Osama bin Laden unloaded over a hundred bullets into him after he was already lying dead on the ground. 
 I do not condone such violence by Christians, Muslims, or people of any other religion. But it is a fact that the people of various religions, including Christianity, have interpreted their Scriptures and their founders–including Jesus–as condoning war and bloodshed against those who do not share their faith. 
 Jesus himself engaged in armed violence in the incident of clearing the temple with a whip (John 2:13-22). He also made the statement, “Do not suppose that I have come to bring peace to the earth. I did not come to bring peace, but a sword  (Matthew 10:34). The Bible is full of violence–and that violence is not confined to the Old Testament. In the book of Revelation there are vast wars involving millions of combatants. 
 Personally, I interpret the wars and violence of the Bible as referring to spiritual battles of good against evil. But many Christians interpret them quite literally. They believe that their religion commands them to take up arms against any who oppose their faith. And right up to this day, various groups of Christians have done just that. And they have done it, not only against people of other religions, but against fellow Christians who happen to belong to a different branch of Christianity. 
 I once attended an impassioned speech given by an American Muslim Imam saying that Islam is a religion of peace, and that those who are taking up arms in the name of Islam are misrepresenting their faith, and giving it a bad name. He stated bluntly that the religion they are preaching and acting upon is not Islam. 
 The fact is, every religion has its zealots. Christianity is no exception. And every religion has its advocates of peace and harmony among the various races and cultures of earth. It is not fair or objective to judge other religions by their fundamentalists and zealots, while judging our own religion by its moderates and mystics. 
 In short, every religion has its beauties, and every religion provides its people with a unique human perspective on the eternal truth that is God. The fact that large groups of people in each religion have turned their religion into a cause for war is due to our common human failings of greed and a desire to rule over others, not due to defects in God’s many ways of reaching out to us through the various religions of the world. 
 Even if some religions may give a clearer picture of God’s truth than others, all of them contain the basics needed for their followers to love God and love their fellow human beings. 
 Thank you for your thoughtful and challenging response to my comments. 
 I don’t want to be rude, but I do wonder if you are suffering from a chronic case of pluralism [Pluralism (noun) 1. a dogmatic adherence to the belief in the validity of a diversity of views and practices demonstrated in a deliberate effort to see other points of view.] the reason I say this is the following quote from your reply: 
 “We humans, though, perceive that truth in various ways. And though I do think we can have clearer and less clear perceptions of the truth, it would be hubris for any human being or religion to claim to have the absolute, pure truth. Only God has that.  
 This the absolute heart of the issue. Do you believe Jesus when he said   I am the way, the truth and the life.  You can’t be a subscriber to pluralism if you do. If you don’t, you aren’t a Christian. Some things are Black and White, and Jesus asks us to make that choice about him. 
 With regard to your second response, of course, I am familiar with the oft quoted passages that suggest that Jesus condoned violence, although I have never heard anyone before say that he engaged in armed violence. That particular passage is controversial because there is much evidence to suggest that the correct translation says he used the whip to drive the animals out, but let’s just say that he used it to scare or even physically drive the traders in the temple out. Do you read about a battlefield covered with the bodies of the fallen? No. At worst a couple chaps might have got a red mark on their backsides…but that is the extreme case scenario. 
 As an ordained Christian minister I’m sure you are aware that when Jesus talks of a sword dividing a household or of not bringing peace he was predicting the trouble that would come to those who followed him, a warning that he makes consistently to his followers. The passage does not say “kill your family members who do not follow me   or “until the world is subdued to my teachings there will be no peace . 
 Yes he tells his disciples to carry a sword when they go out, but he doesn’t command them to lop the heads off the unbelievers if they don’t convert. Rather he says for them to shake the dust off their feet and move on. At worst one might construe this command as a reason to have arms for self defence, but given the turn the other cheek command, even this is a stretch. The fact is he doesn’t tell them what to do with the sword, so we don’t really know what he meant by it, but to conclude that he was suggesting they be violent is a leap. 
 While these very few passages might be used by those who are seeking to be violent as a justification (or for pluralists to somehow demonstrate that Jesus was just as violent as the next crazy prophet from that region), not only are they ignoring the context of the passages, but also just about everything else that Jesus taught, and most importantly did. 
 Do you, as a Christian minister, really conclude that the life and teachings of Christ justify the bloody deeds that have been committed by people in his name? That seems to be what you are saying in part, which I find odd. Of course the Old Testament is a different matter, but Jesus abrogates the nasty stuff, part of the reason he got on the wrong side of the teachers of the Law. 
 In my original remarks I talk specifically about the prophets themselves, not the followers, but if you are to relate the two, I think that anyone who reads the gospels would conclude that those who engage in violence of any kind are generally not following the teachings of Jesus, so you could argue they are not true followers. 
 What about Mohammed? Does the same argument apply to him? Are you familiar with the life and teachings of Mohammed? Are you aware of the fact that in the Hadiths his own faithful followers describe accounts of him slaughtering Christians, Jews and pagans in the thousands, raping captive women, and having sex with his nine year old wife? I’m certain you would be familiar with the commands in the Quran about how to treat infidels and unbelievers, and how Muslims are allowed to lie to us for the furtherance of Islam, which makes debate with Muslims futile. You could argue that those who commit atrocities in the name of Islam in the Middle East, in Africa, in Burma, in Russia, in Europe, in China, in Indonesia, in India etc are doing exactly what Mohammed told them to do and did himself. 
 The difference between Mohammed and Jesus (and just about any other prophet, except possibly Moses) is night and day. 
 Therefore, to conclude, while I agree with your analysis that atrocities have been committed by people from all religions, the facts show that Christians who do so are directly disobeying Christ. Muslims, on the other hand, are obeying their prophet. Using words like moderate or zealot are irrelevant, really you need to define people as true followers of Christ or true followers of Mohammed. 
 Thanks for your reply. To respond to your last point first in good Biblical fashion, I would suggest that if you really want to understand Islam, you speak with Muslims who are not fundamentalists. 
 Not to be rude, but it sounds like your view of Islam comes more from fundamentalist Christian apologetics than it does from reputable Muslim sources. Whether or not you agree with Islam, it’s best to learn about it on its own terms rather than learning about it from the negative analyses of its opponents. 
 Personally, I’m not a Muslim, and I wouldn’t presume to speak on behalf of Islam. However, I’ve had enough conversations with American Muslims to realize that Islam is every bit as complex and layered a religion as Christianity is. Just as moderate Christians don’t generally take literally the commandments of God in the Old Testament to slaughter enemies, including men, women, and children, as good and useful instruction for today, so moderate Muslims do not see the bloodshed in that religion’s historical roots as commanding literal bloodshed today. 
 In short, before coming to all of these negative conclusions about Islam in comparison with Christianity, I would suggest expanding your view of Islam by learning more about it from moderate Muslim sources. Then you’ll be able to compare apples with apples. 
 About Christianity being a religion of peace, and Jesus not literally commanding war and bloodshed, that is my view of Christianity, and it is apparently your view of Christianity as well. 
 But try to tell that to the vast numbers of Christian fundamentalists who do take the “sword  stuff literally. We can interpret these things spiritually and metaphorically all we want. And I happen to think that’s the best way to interpret them. But it’s hard to argue that when Jesus told his followers to carry a sword, he was just engaging in metaphor and didn’t intend them to ever actually use the sword. Why would someone carry a sword–or a gun, for that matter–if they had no intention of ever using it? That doesn’t make sense. If you would never, under any circumstances, use a gun, it would be better not to carry one. 
 And practically speaking, as I already said, Christians have engaged in, and continue to engage in, just as much violence as Muslims or people of any other religion. Presumably Christians who engage in this violence do not believe that they are violating the tenets of their religion. And no matter how wrong you or I may think they are, they will have just as strong a belief that you and I are wrong. We are simply weak Christians in their view, unwilling to put our lives on the line for our faith. 
 In general, it’s a weak argument to try to compare Christianity positively with other religions on the basis of Christianity being less warlike and more peaceful. History and reality just doesn’t bear out this argument. And the Christian scriptures themselves certainly do not make an open and shut case for it. Once again as I already said, the Bible is full of violence, and that does not stop with the Old Testament. Jesus’ own words and actions on this front are such that they can be interpreted either way. 
 Now about pluralism, the definition you give sounds like a definition written by people who don’t like pluralism. 
 In my dictionary, the two most relevant definitions are, “A condition of society in which numerous distinct ethnic, religious, or cultural groups coexist within one nation,  and “Philosophy: The belief that no single explanatory system or view of reality can account for all the phenomena of life.  
 In the first sense, I’m a supporter of pluralism. 
 In the second sense, I’m theoretically not a pluralist. I naturally think my own explanatory system can account for all the phenomena of life. 
 Pragmatically, though, none of us is really that smart or that broadly experienced. We are not God with infinite knowledge and experience of reality. We’re finite human beings, with limited knowledge and experience. So even though I happen to believe that the theological and philosophical system to which I subscribe could account for all the phenomena of life, I don’t think that I personally, or even the whole gang of my fellow believers, could actually accomplish such a monumental task. And I must admit, there are some things I just don’t understand. And probably a lot of things of which I am totally ignorant. 
 That is where I do think multiple systems and approaches will help us to gain a better understanding of reality than one system alone. When many people approach the same problems from different perspectives, through comparison of the results of those various approaches we gain a better understanding of those problems than if we approached them from only one perspective. 
 As I have said several times before, I am a Christian. I do believe what Jesus taught. However, I have a very different view of the meaning of what he taught than that of many traditional Christians. And I simply don’t think it’s as black and white as all that. 
 The universe does have black and white in it. However, it also has many shades of gray, and a nearly infinite variety of colors. To limit Christian belief only to the blacks and the whites is to subscribe to a flat, monochromatic posterization of a complex and highly nuanced religion. 
 This is not the place to provide a full explanation of why I think that particular black and white view of Christianity is mistaken and short-sighted. But here are two articles that will provide some of the basics: 
 I think we are going to have to agree to disagree, but before I sign off I will point out that I have gained my understanding of Islam from visiting and spending time in many Muslim countries (Pakistan, Egypt, Malaysia, Indonesia, Turkey, Aden and Tunisia) and from living in the UK most of my life where there are many more Muslims per head of population than the US, so I have not gained my understanding from Christian fundamentalist websites, but rather by experiencing first hand the suffocating, oppressive and unfair societies that this vile religion spawns. I have also gained my understanding by reading the Quran, the Haddiths and speaking with devout and secular Muslims. It is often the latter who have the most negative things to say about Islam and how the West is tying a noose around its own neck. 
 But enough,because I know all too well that I am wasting my breath. If you can come to the conclusions, and say the things you have about Jesus after years of contemplating his life and teachings, then I know there is no logic or argument that I can create that will make you see the light. 
 Thanks for your reply. Unfortunately, in Muslim countries, and in many Muslim communities around the world, a fundamentalist interpretation of Islam is the dominant one. This is akin to what the Christian nations would be like of the Christian fundamentalists were in the majority and controlled those nations. They would be very different nations than they are now, with moderate and secular Christians largely in control. 
 I specified moderate American Muslims because these Muslims often (not always, I know) live in the U.S. specifically to get away from that stifling fundamentalist interpretation of Islam that is so endemic in the Middle East and even in Europe. 
 About Jesus, for the most part in these comments I have not said what I personally believe. Only what many fundamentalist Christians–whom I strongly disagree with–believe. 
 My own belief is expressed in the article I linked in a previous comment. I believe that Jesus is God with us as the Bible says. I do not believe that there is any parallel (in the usual sense) between Jesus and any human prophet, such as Moses or Mohammed. Jesus is God. All the rest are merely human. 
 Unfortunately, a large segment of Christianity believes in Jesus in a very different way. And they do take very literally the Biblical–including Gospel–statements about swords and warfare. This, at least, you must admit if you have spent any time at all with the Christian fundamentalist zealots who parallel the dominant Muslim fundamentalists in the Middle East. 
 From everything I have read on here you are a gentle man who loves peace and wishes harmony between people of different religions, and that is an incredibly Godly approach to take. I can see that you believe the same about Jesus as I do, but maybe because of our different personality types, express that differently, so I will continue this discussion and will try to be as open as possible. 
 From my observations of Islam in the wider world, the vast majority of Muslims are ordinary people, just wanting to get on with daily life without trouble. They are incredibly hospitable, something I have experienced many times, but their religion has a fatal flaw that will inevitably lead societies that adopt Islam down a certain path. That flaw is Mohammad. He said a lot of good things early in his prophethood, but he turned pretty nasty later on. I am not exaggerating when I say that the Hadiths record genuine atrocities committed by him. He also commanded his followers to treat unbelievers harshly, and even to kill them. He was particularly viscous towards the Jews (he beheaded a thousand in one day after they surrendered to him). Now here is the heart of the flaw…Mohammad is upheld as the perfect Muslim, the one towards whom all young men must look to as a model of perfect behaviour. Since in Islam all his early commands are abrogated by his later ones, it follows that a true Muslim will adopt the same detestable behaviours that Mohammad did in his later years. Thankfully the vast majority don’t, but when men around them, or their leaders head down that path, they rarely stand in the way as they know these men are not behaving in a way that is inconsistent with Islam. This is why so few Muslims openly condemn the atrocities that are happening in the Middle East and Africa at the moment. 
 To your point about Christian fundamentalists…it must be an American thing. Since I became a Christian over 20 years ago, I have never encountered the type of Christians you are talking about. I went to a number of evangelical churches in the UK and now attend one in Canada, and find loving communities that detest violence. 
 I agree to a point that when Jesus told his disciples to carry a sword when they went into the surrounding country, this could, and maybe was intended to be interpreted as a license to have a weapon for self defence. However, the only time that one of his disciples was actually violent, Jesus stopped him, and healed the soldier. Unlike Mohammad, Jesus never ever commanded or participated in genuine aggression (the temple was from all accounts a visceral reaction to seeing the house of God turned into an extortion racket gouging travelling worshippers). 
 Early Christians were non violent, this is not true of early Muslims who rampaged across the Middle East slaughtering all who wouldn’t convert. I honestly believe that you, and the many well meaning people like you who wish to see harmony, who suggest there is no difference between true followers of Christ and true followers of Mohammad are in fact playing straight in to hands of the enemies of Christ. 
 To be clear, I am not saying that there is no difference between true followers of Christ and true followers of Muhammad. In fact, the main point of the article is that different religions are required on earth precisely because of the differences among people and cultures. If Christianity had been a suitable religion for the people who founded and adopted Islam, they would be Christians, not Muslims. 
 I know Christians like to think that their religion would work for everyone. But God is in charge in this world, not us. And I believe that God has provided the various religions for the various cultures of the world because God sees the character and personality of each culture, and provides for it the particular religion required to reach the people of that particular culture and character. 
 In short, true followers of Christ and true followers of Muhammad are different, and that is why they are Christians and Muslims, respectively. 
 What I am saying is that each religion has the basic teachings needed for its followers to love God and love their neighbor–which, according to Jesus, are the two most important commandments in the entire Bible (“the Law and the Prophets ). 
 As you say, most Muslims are good, thoughtful, hospitable people. For them, this is what their religion teaches them to be. And they live by their religion as they understand it. 
 You make a very good point that their leaders are the ones who tend to vitiate their religion. If they are living under fundamentalist zealots, they will tend to be pulled in that direction. If they live under more moderate and peaceful regimes, they will live more peaceably. As a group, American Muslims are much more liberal and peaceful than their counterparts in much of the Middle East. This is both because they live under more peaceful conditions and because they choose to live in a more liberal country due to their own approach to life. 
 I’m aware of the charges against Muhammad. I’m aware that those Muslims who lean in that direction can justify literal jihads and literal warfare against the infidel by reference to their holy book and the actions their prophet. 
 However, I don’t agree that this is the inevitable course of Islam. 
 We have many Christian fundamentalist zealots in the U.S. who stockpile weapons and periodically engage in various types of armed violence based on their religious beliefs. Usually they are suppressed fairly quickly. But if they were ever to grow greatly in numbers and gain power, we would be living in a very different country–a much more violent and intolerant one, similar to the countries that are ruled by Muslim fundamentalists. 
 Meanwhile, Islam has its moderates and even its mystics. The mystical Sufi branch of Islam has a broad, tolerant, peaceful view of humanity. It views the war and bloodshed in Muslim scripture and history not as a pretext for literal violence, but as an expression of the spiritual warfare of good and justice against evil and injustice. 
 Islam originated at a very violent time in human history. It would be surprising if there weren’t violence associated with its beginnings. But just as Judaism has left behind its early practice of animal sacrifice at the tabernacle and then the Temple, which was central to its religious practice in pre-Christian times, and instituted a synagogue system and a concept of personal sacrifice to replace literal animal sacrifice, so Islam is able to change and grow beyond the violence of its early years. 
 I believe it is only a matter of time before this happens. 
 Unfortunately, the areas of the world where Islam predominates are still quite violent. This makes it harder for that religion to move out of fundamentalist zealotry and into a more moderate stance, as most of Judaism and Christianity has done. As the conflicts that plague the Middle East are gradually resolved (not without much conflict), and that region moves toward a more peaceful existence in some possibly distant future, I believe Islam will take a similar course. 
 With regard to Christian fundamentalists creating societies like the ones created by fundamentalist Muslims, if they were to create ones that were focused entirely on Christ and his teachings, they would be amazing…even if people had swords for self protection! 
 If Christians in general were focused on loving Christ and living by his teachings, we would be living in a very different world! 
 Seriously mate, you lost me when you said that Jesus Christ isn’t for everyone. As an ordained minister are truly a woof in sheeps clothing. 
 To reduce it to slogan-like brevity, I would say that Jesus Christ is for everyone, but not everyone is for Jesus Christ. 
 In somewhat less cryptic but still brief form, I would say that the salvation wrought by Jesus Christ saved everyone on earth–no matter what their religion–from certain damnation. It was a universal salvation that covered the entire world, including non-Christians. However, not all people can accept Christianity as their religion. And within the various religions, not everyone accepts the salvation made possible by Jesus Christ’s redemption of the world. 
 This will probably not make sense without reading the above-linked article. 
 What I said was that Christianity as a religion does not work for everyone. That’s quite different from saying that Jesus Christ isn’t for everyone. 
 Christianity as it actually exists in the world is not very much like what Jesus Christ taught and demonstrated in the Gospels. If Christianity as a religion were truly Christlike, then Christianity would work for a lot more of the world’s people than it presently does. As it is now, Christianity as a religion often gives Christ a bad name, and repulses many people who might otherwise accept Jesus Christ. 
 It is in the church I go to! But I do agree with the overall sentiment of the statement…the church has given Jesus a bad name. Glad I made you laugh 🙂 
 Lee: Thank you! I have been struggling with these issues for the past several years. The struggle is coming to a head this week as I prepare a lecture on scripture for this weekend at a Catholic retreat. Born and raised Catholic, faded from religion in my 20s and 30s, then soaked in New Age and reincarnation during that era, “born again  into fundamentalism with John (fell in love with Jesus), then repulsed by fundamentalism (everyone’s going to hell but us), now back to Catholic. Why? Because I realized that it DOES NOT MATTER. Jesus is my God. I’m still in love with Him. Jesus is not everyone’s God. Yes he said, “No one comes to the Father but through me.  I believe that means, “I died for everyone,  not “You’re all screwed.  Pope Francis thinks that as well (though I am not a staunch defender of the hierarchy). In fact, much of it offends me. I am discontent with much of Catholicism, but I was/am much more discontent with fundamentalism, and there are certainly fundamentalist Catholics as well. They reproach me when my Protestant tendencies manifest themselves. They think Protestants are going to hell. I’m devoting much of my lecture to the Inquisition, and how Deuteronomy was used to justify the burning to death of heretics and the arrest of Galileo. I hope I’m not stoned. Anyway, it has been quite an anxiety provoking experience putting the lecture together. Self examination often is. Your comments have been affirming and comforting. Thank you. 
 Thanks for your comment. I’m glad you found this article helpful. And wow! It sounds like you’ve really gone through the full cycle, spiritually speaking. I hope your lecture goes well. If you have a moment, stop by afterwards and let us know that you were able to escape both stoning and the Inquisition! 🙂 
 It does help to have a community of fellow believers to share our faith with. If one isn’t available that fully accords with our own beliefs, then finding a generally comfortable and congenial one is often still preferable to having no community of faith at all. Good luck on your future endeavors! 
 Well Lee, I did escape stoning, but not the Inquisition! The priest in attendance called me into a room afterwards to proclaim his disgust with what I had to say. “Why did you trash the magisterium?  “You blew it.  etc There is simply no way of not offending a fundamentalist Catholic with a simple retelling of the stories of the Cadaver Synod, the Albigensian Crusade with the Massacre at Beziers, the burning to death of Giordano Bruno, and the trial of Galileo, just as there is no way of not offending a fundamentalist Protestant in saying that the world was not created in the exact manner that is described in Genesis. 
 Thanks for the post mortem! You were brave to wade into that lion’s den with some history that is very uncomfortable for that particular organization. The Inquisition continues! 😉 
 I must say that your article has enlightened me. At least I have some answers. I was born Catholic, still Catholic for formality. My interest in the Catholic church started windling slowly as I grew up and started to discover gaps and inconsistencies in Christianity. I felt like a fraud going to church, receiving Holy Communion, singing along and yet my heart wasn’t there. Sometimes guilt hangs over me and I don’t know why. I believe in God’s wholesome existence, just not sure about religion. I have 3 qtns for you; 
 1. Free will. From the little I know about Christian teachings, God gave man free will. But the more I have thought about this notion the more I have come to believe that it is not real. Here is why- God is omnipotent, omnipresent,blah blah… He is the beginning and the end meaning He knows each person’s future, which means He has already mapped out each person’s path (this implies pre-determined choices/options). How then can we speak of free will vis-a-vis God’s will? For free will to have meaning, any choice one makes should be sanction free. e.g if we indeed have free will, people can choose to not believe in God without any reprisal or punishment. But hell exists as punishment for sinners. Of course we have power of choice over certain simple things like where to live, what to buy, when to pee, who to marry, number of children etc. But I feel as though this is a faux free will because each of us is just a self fulfilling prophecy living out the path drawn by God. 
 2. Generational curses. I interacted with a Catholic priest on one occasion. We talked about generational curses. He told me that there were special prayers one could say to the Holy Spirit for a revelation about curses in one’s family. He explained that some people’s misfortunes are not their own doing but rather a product of a generational curse. Well I found it hard to believe. I am not an expert on the Bible but I know that this issue is mentioned somewhere in the O.T, something about the sins of the father…(Please enlighten me :D). Furthermore, how can they be valid if Jesus brought universal salvation to mankind and conquered sin and death? Secondly if generational curses are valid it implies that a mere man’s words can alter God’s will/purpose for another person. I could be wrong though. And thirdly if they are valid, why would God let a person suffer for sins he did not commit. It would not be fair for one to bear his ancestor’s burden and yet he was not privy to their misdeeds. 
 3. Basing on the teaching commanding us to love, even our enemies,can God forgive Satan? Just wondering…. 
 Thanks for stopping by, and for your thoughtful comments and great questions! I’m glad this article is helpful to you. I have also heard about issues with Catholics and guilt, so I don’t think you’re alone in that. About attending services, I would say that if they are helpful to you, you don’t necessarily have to agree with everything that goes on in them. But if they are not helpful to you, it may be time to question whether to continue attending, and perhaps search for something else that offers more of what you are seeking. 
 Your questions are great ones, which deserve whole posts on their own. Perhaps if you follow the blog you’ll one day find that I’ve answered one or more of them more fully! For now, here are some very quick responses, just so you’re not left hanging for too long. 
 1. Yes, free will is central to Christianity as I understand it. Without it, there is no meaning to most of the Bible’s teachings about choosing God, goodness, and love over selfishness, evil, greed, and hate. 
 My view is that while God knows our future, God does not decide or determine our future. Another way of saying this is that although God knows what choice we will make, we are still the ones making that choice. As a simple example of the principle involved, if I drop a ball, I know that it will fall to the ground, but I don’t cause it to fall to the ground. 
 2. The idea of generational curses comes, among other places, from none other than the Ten Commandments, where we read, “I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me  (Exodus 20:5, King James Version). 
 It’s hard to deny that children do suffer for the sins of their parents. And we often struggle with the same issues that our parents struggled with. So in this sense, the “iniquity of the fathers  is “visited upon the children  for generations. 
 However, I believe it is possible to break these “generational curses  through the process that the Bible refers to as being “born again,  and that my own spiritual tradition calls “regeneration.  On that, see this article: Heaven, Regeneration, and the Meaning of Life on Earth 
 3. Yes, I do believe that God forgives even Satan. The separation between Satan and God is not because God has condemned Satan, but because Satan has rejected God. 
 However, from my perspective, Satan is not some fallen angel, but rather is the combined evil of all humankind gathered into a single composite evil being. In other words, Satan and the Devil are the same thing as hell. For more on hell from my perspective, see: Is There Really a Hell? What is it Like? 
 About God loving even the evil, here’s a beautiful passage from the Gospel of Matthew: 
 “You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’ But I say to you, Love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, so that you may be children of your Father in heaven; for he makes his sun rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the righteous and on the unrighteous.  (Matthew 5:43-45) 
 I realize these are brief and inadequate answers to some very big questions. But I do hope they’ll give you something to hang onto until that halcyon day when I can write up some posts that do justice to these huge subjects. 
 I think this article if known to every religious and non-religious person on the planet will save a lot of troubled minds from confusion with which they are suffering and will reduce lot of conflicts also. 
 But then I guess people need to have a burning desire to discover the mystery. This article and all other knowledge is just one google search away, but the concerned person needs to feed in the correct inquiry before he gets enlightened with knowledge. The deeper a seeker seeks, the deeper he will go. We need to start directing our free will in right direction and then more will be revealed to us. 
 Thanks for stopping by, and for your thoughtful comment! Yes, those who seek will find. 
 With all of these religions creating so much confusion, we must know that they are man-made. Because Is Good and He Is Not the author or creator of confusion. 
 God Is a Spirit(and His Spirit is within each and every one of which He created). Therefore, in the order for us to please God and be or become Saved, we must live according to our Spirit. The flesh is mammon(that which we shall not serve. Because the flesh is evil and not good). We must not serve God and mammon (Spirit and flesh). So serve God. God directs, corrects, disciplines, speaks to and through, us in our Spirit, which He created in His likeness and in His image (the Spirit). Now, there is flesh (all of our senses and our brain which speaks to our senses, our limbs, and more…..)and Spirit, because that is what He liked for us. Our flesh becomes of God, if and when we serve our Spirit only, which is the wrestle, the fight, and the battle. While our flesh has become evil due to our own thought and our lack of Spiritual knowledge. Remember, (We) wrestle, not against flesh and blood, but, against principalities (a territory of a prince (ruler), powers, and the rulers of the darkness (lack of Spiritual knowledge) of this world, against (Spiritual) wickedness (morally bad or not knowing) in high places (greater degree). 
 Thanks for expressing your thoughts and sharing your inspiration. 
 I agree with much of what you say. We certainly are in a spiritual battle between light and darkness. And we must follow God and spirit, not flesh and blood, if we are going to win that battle. I also agree that if we do follow God and spirit, then we will become servants of God in our flesh (our body) as well as in our spirit. The flesh is evil only when it fights against God and spirit. When it is the willing instrument of God and spirit, it becomes blessed and good, not from itself, but from the spirit that moves it from within. 
 Yes, the various religions are made by humans, not by God. Even Jesus did not start a religion or a church. His followers did. The various Christian churches are human attempts to follow Christ’s example. The quality of a church or a religion depends upon the quality of its leaders and of the people who belong to it. We humans, being imperfect, will never follow God’s will perfectly. As long as there are human beings involved, there will be some confusion, because none of us has a perfect understanding. Only God does. 
 Still, if a religion moves its people toward living more God- and spirit-filled lives, and toward loving and serving their fellow human beings, then it is doing its job, even if it isn’t perfect, and has some confusion. 
 However, if a church or religion strays too far from doing God’s work, and becomes self-centered and greedy instead, it will be removed from its place, lose its power, and fade into insignificance over time. That is how God exercises judgment on human institutions that no longer serve God. The wheels of justice may sometimes turn slowly, but they do turn. God’s justice will prevail in its own time. 
 I believe there is a difference between faith and religion. If you truly believe(have faith) in God and in what he teaches all these worldly concerns such as religion become pointless. Follow what God says, and everything else will fall into place. In the end Christianity is no better then any other religion,I guess you could say the word of God is the one true religion, but in the end the word of God transcends our worldly/human existence. In short religion is pointless, the word of God and faith is all that matters. But that is just my humble opinion. 
 Thanks for your thoughtful comment. I agree that the key issue is our faith in God–and also following what God teaches. 
 However, many people do not have the ability or commitment to go it alone spiritually. They need a church or spiritual group to belong to in order to receive spiritual teaching and get together with others to strengthen one another in their faith. This, I think, is why in addition to faith, there have been various religions on the earth throughout recorded history. 
 Without faith, and the life of kindness that accompanies true faith, religion means nothing. But for people of faith, religion can be a guide and support for their faith. 
 Hello, Firstly Mr. Lee, great work. Your thoughts and ideas are wonderful. I was an atheist for most of my lifetime though never disrespected any religion or beliefs simply because i feel i am not that capable or have so much of understanding. To believe in any religion or any form of god is one’s own right. We all are in one direction but in different paths. Many believe they are right and the other person is wrong. It is always according to me wrong to say it is only we who are correct. My religion is only correct. Unfortunately people see who has taught was rather than what has been taught. All religions say there is love. People do not understand that there is in real just one religion and that is the religion of love. The basic truth in all religions, irrespective of country or race is one and the same In the words of a famous baba in India, There is only one religion, the religion of Love; There is only one language, the language of the Heart; There is only one caste, the caste of Humanity Nations are many, but Earth is one; Beings are many, but Breath is one; Stars are many, but Sky is one; Oceans are many, but Water is one; Religions are many, but God is one; Jewels are many, but Gold is one; Appearances are many, but Reality is One. God is something which i feel a human being is incapable of understanding. It is beyond his capacity to understand what god is thoroughly and completely. We in our lives try our very best to understand and end up misunderstanding each other itself leading to unwanted issues. We all are creation of god. Everything is created by god. Whatever happens is because of god. But what is god? Who is god? We will never know. But we can reach god only through silence and love. Irrespective of religion, god loves everyone through various religions. We need to have faith not only in the religion but also have faith in the god in the religion. Not just the words, but the wisdom. God will never discriminate. We are all members of the same family, bound by the Religion of Love. 
 Thanks for stopping by. Yes, God “makes his sun rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the righteous and on the unrighteous  (Matthew 5:45). God brings us all together. We humans separate ourselves from one another. 
 I feel as though this article presents a very narrow view of what one could call “God , most apparent in the fact that you refer to this entity in the singular form. This conception of “god  is not only singular and perfectly “good . 
 This sprouts from the fact hat when expounding your ideas, you often draw similarities between Judaism, Christianity, and Islam which doesn’t seem very diverse considering they’re Abrahamic faiths and therefore share very similar traditional ‘history’ with bits added on as time and culture and geography shifted. Though you do mention other faiths, and the personal conceptions others have, you mainly respond to comments in these threads in such fashion. 
 It makes sense to say that these faiths have the “oneness  of “God  with some Hindu religions, where all gods are an expression of the same entity, Brahma . . . but that’s modern . . . let’s wind back the clock. What about Vedic religion? What about the ancient Greeks? Romans? Persians? What about the Isrealites and Caananites that worshiped Yaweh among a pantheon of other gods before those gods were demonized in the Hebrew Bible? Those gods are not singular, nor are they always good, they represent aspects of nature and life. You mentioned this somewhat, but most don’t have conceptions of salvation or afterlives, or even sin. 
 I think it would be more logical to hold and speculate from the position that there is a human socio-biological desire to be connected to a community and to ascribe meaning to things which don’t seem to have meaning, to give consciousness to impersonal forces. This is something utterly verifiable in the psychological and sociological fields, it has testable hypotheses and predictions. 
 Instead, you choose to see the similarities between religions as proving a conception of “God  that is purely speculative. Despite a tradition of Aristotle and Descartes, god’s perfection and “goodness  are in question. If there is/are creator(s) for this universe, this entity’s only defining characteristic we can be sure about is that he/she/it/them is the creator. That’s it. We cannot prove anything beyond this. Yes, many modern faiths propose this kind of god. Can you respond on why you didn’t take this into account? 
 Yes, I am speaking from a monotheistic perspective, and I presume that most of my readers who are not atheists will be monotheists rather than polytheists. Spiritually and philosophically, monotheism works better than polytheism to explain the nature of the physical and spiritual universe. That’s why the general trend in religion over the past few thousand years has been away from polytheism and toward monotheism. As you say, even Hinduism, a historically polytheistic religion, has developed the idea that all of the gods are different expressions of a single underlying God. 
 However, the same general principle described in the article applies to polytheistic religions as to monotheistic religions. Those who adhere to them and practice them faithfully with the intent to please their gods and serve their neighbors will find their place in heaven after they die. Ultimately, the important thing is not the belief; it is the intent and the action as informed by the belief. Beliefs simply mold and shape good (or evil) intentions in one direction or another. If the motivation is good, it will eventually find a channel toward good. 
 Proof is a slippery concept. As popularly used, it really means preponderance of evidence, not absolute proof. The fact is, we cannot even prove that the material universe exists. The only things for which we have direct evidence of their existence are non-material in nature. For more on this, see the article, “Where is the Proof of the Afterlife?“ 
 Simply because monotheism seems to be a better explanation does not mean that it is the one that should take the front and I feel as though it demeans the beliefs of other faiths to assert particulars of that faith are incorrect because your conception of god is correct. An obvious one is the notion of an afterlife, something not every religion shares, not even modern ones. 
 But will take the notion that monotheism works better, and forgive me if the bulk of my response is to the “Where is the Proof of the Afterlife  concept because that is one of the assumptions of the universe I think you’ve made. 
 If we are to go, as I said, to the Cartesian tradition, I’d take the epistemological claim of the cogito to the Lichtenberg level. The only thing we can possibly know is that not even that “I  am thinking, only that “thinking is occurring  and some part of it has the impression of consciousness, as the agency of the “I  is too great a speculation for the cogito argument. 
 There is therefore no way to pluck out the “proof of spirit  versus “proof of matter  that you do. I don’t understand the connection you draw between having emotions, which is simply thought occurring to having a soul or spirit. As the Cartesian meditations expound, emotions and feelings are a type of thought. We cannot know the nature of these thoughts, “material  or “non-material . Those descriptions, even, are extremely problematic, because they come from a supposed material world. You are placing a dichotomy that you know of (experiencing sensations as material and experiencing cognation as immaterial) and trying to fit it in a speculative universe where you are only a Cartesian “thinking thing . In such a universe, all things could be an extension of the thinking that is occurring and there is no “material  or “immaterial  because such a distinction could not be made. 
 If we are to live in this “thinking thing  universe, where the only things we experience are extensions of the though that occurs, then we still to operate under the laws that make themselves apparent to us. This universe of thought, of course, is the universe we may live in. A part of this thought has the impression of consciousness (I might try to call this part “me ), and therefore must assert that it is conscious; and a part of it experiences touch and must make the assumption that touch exists and there exists an extension of thought that is interacting with it to give it the sensation of touch. This extension appears in the thinking universe to be a wall, and I receive its touch through what I will call a hand. I hope I am being clear enough, because this thought experiment makes it apparent that even if we are in the cogito universe, we still have to operate under the laws which SEEM to work. Every day some extension of the thought universe (we can call this extension the “sun ) rises, as Aristotle put it when he tried to explain Induction, and every day it would set. From this I can garner the strong assumption that it will rise and set again. And each morning and night it does, making my assumption stronger. Operating in this universe makes very little difference. We still have to use our rationality, or otherwise this universe, even if it is an illusory extension of the thought that occurs, would begin to be rather an uneasy place to “live  in. 
 (In addition to this, and an argument I haven’t spent a lot of time thinking about so sorry if it seems a bit mad, but the Induction Problem that Descartes uses to slowly destroy the “material  universe would also work for his logic. Though rationality works for us a hundred times over, it only “seems  to have worked. There is no way to know that the logical train from A to C will go through B. When it boils down to pure speculation, it can be asserted that we can’t even use our rationality to conceive the cogito argument because our rationality and the processes it uses (syllogisms, etc) are a priori based assumptions.) 
 But I apologize for that wordage. I feel as though it lead you away from what I was trying to communicate. Let’s just assume we and the universe actually properly exist because while you say proof is a slippery slope, I think I’ve made it clear I think epistemology simply a landslide. 
 What Descartes says about God in his meditations was what I was commenting on. Descartes holds the traditional Aristotelian view of god as the Unmoved Mover, the perfect, omniscient, omnipotent, and ‘good’ being. This is why he has to create the “evil genius  to describe the illusions and trickery that he works with to establish the cogito. However, this action betrays his thought of “god  as an entity of “good . Meanwhile, in his hypothetical universe, there needn’t be an evil genius. The “Evil  genius could simply be God, the entity from which Descartes asserts we have all of our information about the universe. God needn’t be any mortal conception of Good or Evil. God could just as well be a child playing with a ball of of “thought  (or in the universe we think we live in, a ball of cosmic matter) and out experiences are the output. What I am trying to assert is that there is only a very shallow depth of characteristics we can ascribe to God. There is little else beyond the assertion that he/she/it/them is the creator. Creation is the only attribute we can ascribe to this entity. That’s it. The logic doesn’t follow that he should be good and love his creation, or that his good is the same as ours . . . his good could be our evil for all we know. Indeed, an “afterlife  and a “reward  for pleasing this entity (though how we could please an infinite being I don’t know) seems to be purely a wish. 
 And to the “near-death experiences  notion . . . the parts of the brain that control reality perception literally are not functioning properly when one is in such a state to have such an experience. One could be dreaming and that dream will seam a thousand times more real, more amazing, more fulfilling, than what they eventually wake up to. And if you assert we don’t have a brain, I assert that in the “thought universe  it is difficult (if you follow the arguments I put up above) to assert that “dying  happens to thinking things . . . which we simply don’t know. 
 To be clear, I am not a Cartesian. Descartes made many leaps of logic in his derivation of the entire structure of God and spirit starting from Cogito ergo sum. 
 However, I do think that Descartes’ “I think, therefore I am  aphorism itself has merit. The only thing of which we have direct experience is our own consciousness–which he identified as “thinking.  He could also have said, “I feel (emotionally), therefore I am.  Regardless of whether you wish to accept this as an “I  or as some other entity, the fact remains that our mental and emotional states are the only things of whose existence we have direct, incontrovertible evidence because we experience them for ourselves with no intermediaries. Everything else we experience indirectly. 
 It is on this basis that I state in the “Where is the Proof of the Afterlife?  article that there is more evidence for the existence of the things usually called spiritual than there is for the existence of the things usually called material. To add some specificity, there is more evidence for things not measurable in time and space–such as thoughts and feelings–than there is for things that are measurable in time and space–such as stars and galaxies. And science deals only with things that can be measured in time and space. 
 The idea that the physical universe exists objectively out there is an assumption, not something that can be proven. Yes, that assumption works pretty well. Things seem to operate quite consistently as if the material world does exist objectively out there. However, it still remains an assumption, since an equally valid interpretation would be that the world of mind operates by definite rules, and that is why we seem to perceive the (possibly nonexistent) physical world around us to operate by definite rules. 
 Atheists who speak of mind operating arbitrarily, and therefore denigrate it as being an invalid basis for reality, are in the stone age as far as their understanding of mind is concerned. The more we research the mind, the more it appears that it does indeed operate by a complex but definite set of rules. There is nothing arbitrary or haphazard about it. Flying pink elephants and such are a ridiculous canard of atheists who seem to miss the point that whatever reality may be, it has definite characteristics, and is not a blank canvas on which we can paint any old thing that strikes our fancy. 
 This also means that not all conceptions of God and spirit are equally valid. They may provide a pathway to God even if they are in error. However, there is spiritual truth and spiritual falsity just as there is material truth and material falsity. Spiritual reality is not dependent upon our conception of it for its reality. God is also not dependent upon our conception of God for God’s reality. If God exists, then God exists as a definite entity independent of our particular conceptions of God. So we can’t just come up with any old thing and say, “That’s God.  Or at least, we can’t do that if we wish to understand (to the limits of our mental capacity) what God actually is. 
 Back to material reality, as I say in the article, I happen to believe that the material world does exist objectively out there. But I recognize that this is an assumption, and not something that can be conclusively demonstrated or proven. It would do atheists and materialistic scientists a world of good to have the humility to recognize that their view of reality is based on something that cannot itself be proven. Perhaps then some of the hubris observed in their unfounded pronouncements about the non-existence of God and spirit would be ameliorated. If theists would have the same humility, then perhaps the interaction between the two could cease being a shouting match and instead become a productive conversation. 
 I read your insights and the questions many people ask themselves everyday. Which religion is right and wrong? Is there such a powerful being known as God? Is it wrong to question the all mighty God of his existence? Many religions influence or try to persuade others that there religion is following the right way to God. That others won’t be saved if they don’t have the Holy Spirit sealed in them if they don’t get baptized at the right age to Christians beliefs. I understand they have there beliefs and what they follow on there everyday life but wouldn’t you question yourself once. In my way of thinking, religion doesn’t matter to me, I was born in a catholic family and I personally wasn’t the church type of person and people from different religions would say you have to go to church to be closer to God or your going to hell. I always ignored the fact that not going to church would label me as a non believer and condemned me to my fate known as hell. I thought that was utterly ridiculous since I have done nothing wrong but believe in what is right. I’m a curious one, I question everyday life, if God made us in his image why didn’t we all come out pure and kind hearted as he did? We all doubt and we can’t lie about that. I was never religious, never will be since Im not that type of person, but it doesn’t mean I don’t believe in God any less. But why be known or labeled as a Christian, Catholic, Muslim, or so on. What satisfaction do we get from it? Why not just be a freedom of belief and follow what feels right to me? As long as I’m doing right isn’t that good? If I follow what the bible says isn’t that right and good? To some people, it seems it just not good enough. All of us have sinned, that is true and you can’t say you haven’t. We all have had a small doubt, done something bad, or wrong. We have all broken at least one rule or law along the way. So does that label our fate to eternal damnation? There are worse things, killing another human being with no remorse and liking it is surely seen as your fate to be hell am I right? Well, many Christians say   God forgives many since he loves all his children . Which yes he loves all his children and many killers are forgiven perhaps since there heart showed the truth of realizing what they have done. But they still broke a rule and jus to say perhaps went to heaven. How about the other millions that were forgiven possibly. They say lying is a sin, which it’s bad to lie but not as bad as killing a person, we all lie whether it’s a white lie or a big lie but I see no harm in it, it’s just a habit we all do and that better the killing obviously. Even stealing is a sin which yes it’s wrong but to what extent? The government steals from us everyday, a child stealing food to survive is still stealing regardless but for the right to survive another day, or stealing from the rich and give to the poor. It benefits another person not yourself, for the child it benefits the child and is it wrong though? I say no, because lying and stealing is common we all have done it and we broke God’s rule. But he will forgive us if it was for a good reason. There’s always evil in good and there’s always good in evil. They both can’t live without each other. There needs to be a balance in light and dark. We are not good or evil, we are just neutral since we harvest both deep inside. We all have love and hate in us. We all have a killer inside of us or a hero to save lives. I personally think being considered a type of religion you are in is pointless since you can’t fight to see who wins this battle since every religion is right in there own way of speaking. So why fight back to see who is the right one to follow and refer to others. We are born on the same earth no matter what part we reside, we voice our opinions which is alright, we ask questions which is completely healthy to do, since we aren’t perfect or we cant say we know everything since there’s no one smarter then God. Our questions won’t ever be completely answered which is fine since that what makes us still question and think of everyday things. Just live and keep on living the life you wish to have, love yourself and love others and worry a little less. That seems like a good start and religion isn’t everything, it’s how you connect the dots that make your life. You know better then anyone what is right and how you should live it. 
 Thanks for your thoughts. Lots of things to think about! People usually think of being religious as belonging to a particular religion, going to church, and so on. That works well for those who like to be part of a group that shares their faith. Others are more individualistic in their beliefs and their spiritual practice. As long as there is a desire to live for what is good and true, serve others in good and useful ways, and ideally look to God as the source of everything, then the person is on a pathway to heaven. At least, that is my belief. 
 This page has been very helpful. Thanks to all that has dedicated time in putting this page together. I have always considered myself a Christian by standard even without attending a church very often in my adulthood as I did growing up and for a lot of years I have struggled with what seems to be taught so often that if you don’t accept Christ in your life then you are wrong as to me this has always implied all others in the world will not be accepted into heaven because other beliefs are so differnt but yet the same. I always found this act of judging others to be opposite of what was trying to be taught through the teachings of Jesus as I could not understand how in learning To accept and follow Christ so many chose to pass on judgement to others who chose to follow there own relegious beliefs that didn’t follow Christ … It has always seemed to be taught as a double standard and that part I could not accept …in looking up the topic I found this page and it has given me a totally differnt view point that I needed Again thanks to all that took time to share their own insight here as well 
 Thanks for stopping by and expressing your thoughts. I’m glad this article was helpful for you! As I see it, Christianity is about loving and serving our neighbors, not about judging and condemning them if they don’t believe the same way you do. 
 Belief in God is great nothing wrong with that. If you don’t believe in God that’s Ok to as long as you have good moral upbringing and you believe that you want to search for answers as to why there is life on this planet why are we here and how did the universe get here I believe someone had to light the match and I personally call that someone GOD. What I don’t believe in is religion . From beginning of time man was fighting and killing not so much in a religion state but in a tribal system than religious beliefs of each tribe took over and wars began. Jesus the Prince of Peace showed up and started a religion called Christianity just to try and get the population of the world at that time to have some moral guidance Than over the next few hundred years whoever didn’t agree with Christianity change it to suit themselves Now we have fanatic religious terrorists DO away with religion believe in GOD or a Search for God Live on this planet in peace as we where meant to do. 
 Ideally, religion would be a gathering of people who believe in God, and strengthen one another in that belief, and in living their lives according to it. Unfortunately, like most other human institutions, even if a religion is good and helpful when it starts, it tends to get corrupted by money and power as it grows and gains influence over people’s minds and hearts. I believe that’s what has happened with most religions today. There is a need for renewal, or more likely for replacement with new ways for people to gather together in God’s name, for God’s purposes. 
 I believe that there is only one God and therefore one religion. “God is the same yesterday, today, and forever.  Wouldn’t this mean that the same church that Jesus Christ established many years ago should be on the earth today? I believe that that same church is on the earth today. 
 FYI I belong to the “Mormon  church. I like to think of Joseph Smith when he asked God which of all the churches is right and his answer came as the First Vision. 
 Thanks for your comment. As I say in the article, God speaks the same message to people of many different times and cultures, but all hear it differently, each according to that person’s or that culture’s own unique experience. 
 Individually, Good and Evil is innate; it’s within us. 
 Collectively, Good and Evil = Greater Good and Greater Evil. 
 The good will do good and the bad will do bad but if you want the good to bad then you’ll need a religion for that. 
 I don’t believe we were born in sin and need to seek forgiveness. I believe we were born good. 
 As with most other things, religion is good for those who are good, and bad for those who are bad. Ideally it convinces those who are bad to be good, but that doesn’t always happen. 
 This made me so happy when I saw someone else thought like I do. This is what I’ve been trying to tell anyone that tells me others are wrong in what they believe. It upsets me when people can be so narrow minded at times, I wish they’d realize everyone is different and interprets differently. I love how you stated this, how religions come from the same base. I couldn’t agree more. I feel everyone started at the same religion, but just like when you play that childhood game Telephone, words and phrases are changed and heard differently, therefore at the end, people get different meanings. It’s a relief and very refreshing to see someone put something like this up. I love this article and I support every word! 
 Thanks! I’m glad this article hit home for you! It makes no sense to me that God would create billions of people and give most of them religions that don’t work. Why would God do that? God loves all people, not just the ones with the “right  religion (which is our religion, of course! 😉 ). 
 Hello, Lee You’ve hit the nail on the head. The truth is, I’ve seen manifestations of EVERY spiritual path I’ve ever followed. From Christ to Ramana Maharshi to intergallactic humans. I think you’re right in that God will tailor whatever response is necessary to reach us, while remaining hidden behind the curtain–a mystery. Meanwhile, expressing this opinion is not likely to make you popular. too much is invested in one’s belief, religion, spiritual path, etc. So yes, there is a Jesus, a throne room, a heaven, but it doesn’t stop there. Even the belief that everything else is a satanic deception is a belief! Thanks your putting yourself out there! Gary 
 Thanks for your good words. Truth is not a popularity contest! Having said that, this is the most popular post on the blog so far–which gives me some extra hope for humanity. 
 With time, I think that to start with people were on the right track concerning the idea of there being a higher power, but. As humans we can only use our imagination as to what/who they might be like, & said depictions have (interestingly enough) stuck since they were introduced. Nevertheless, I wonder what it was like during the period when some of these religions came about…. Or, what did each first religious group experience that sparked a lasting following of their own? 
 Though, I feel certain (okay, believe) that there is a main force in charge (even if there are other gods), which then I more or less consider to be “God – even if this “God  is not exactly how the world would usually percieve them…. Even still, I will always wonder…. 
 I do think that in ancient times people were less focused on the material world and material possessions, and were therefore more in tune with the spiritual realm. They had conversations with angels, and with God speaking through the angels, and were able to receive much wisdom in that way. 
 For thousands of years after that, when humanity became more outward-looking and materialistic, such open communication with the spiritual world became rare. However, the wisdom passed down from those ancient people, and later written down in the various sacred texts of humanity, continued to make it possible for those who sought a deeper view of life to find some spiritual enlightenment through those ancient texts. 
 Today I believe humanity is gradually moving back toward a spiritual focus, and therefore there is more spiritual light coming into the world than there has been in a long time. 
 Awesome commentary…. it encapsulated my thoughts for the past 40 years. Bravo!!!!! 
 Thanks for this article Sir. I just have an observation & a question. if it is just as this article suggests it is,it then means we are not supposed to evangelize. Perhaps,my deduction could be wrong,hence the question- what exactly is evangelism? To whom is it to be directed? who should do it? How is it to be done? & to what end & for what purpose should it be done? Already submitted a conundrum on this sir. Awaiting your response. Thanks 
 Thank you for writing this article, it has helped me a lot. Right now I’m having a struggle between which faith to choose. My friend says that I’m going to hell because I’m not I don’t believe in Christianity and my mum says that I can’t leave Islam because I have to be in a religion but I don’t trust religion. I pray to God by talking to him every night and apparently I sit on the fence and have to choose but in your insight Do I have to choose a religion? Apparently I have to and my heart and just me does not trust it so what would you think? 
 Thanks for your comment. I’m glad this article is helpful to you. Your questions are very personal and soul-searching. To do them justice, I will respond in a separate article, which should go up within the next day or two. 
 Lee, you believe in your god, whoever that is, and all the people on earth should follow this god, this all loving, all powerful, omnipotent god. Yet this god is such a small god that it requires people to defend him/her. You have the holy bible in hand as your book of eternal knowledge, which you can quote from scriptures to justify a position you hold. When I read the bible, I see it as it is written, no more, no less. I do not try to bend it, twist it, warp it to suit me. 
 I have always had an enquiring mind, the thirst for knowledge, and the words and parables found in the bible could never satisfy my questions. I came from one the Abrahamic cults, Christianity, which was sub divided to a Catholic home where we went to church every Sunday. I think from the age of about eight, if not younger, I could see the church for what it was, a farce. I hated going to church, to me there was nothing more stupid then people going there, Sunday in, Sunday out, saying the same thing over and over. Stand up, kneel down, stand up, sit down. Nope, this is not for me. My parents never forced me to go to church from when I was ten. I asked question like; if we are made from dust, then why is there still dust? If god is there, why doesn’t he talk to us? 
 When I was sixteen, I went to a “happy clappy  church (I think it was a Rhema church) with a friend of mine, where he wanted to show me something about the so called “faith healing  services they did. The preacher stood up there shouting to the congregation what sinners we all were and were doomed for a journey to hell if we didn’t repent. Now I found this very amusing, here we have a “authority of his god  telling us we are going to hell. Then the time for the magic came; people were falling over themselves as this guy was putting his hand on their foreheads and pushing them, they fell down and made as though they were talking in tongues. To my surprise, a friend of ours was there, on crutches, and he got healed alright, there was nothing wrong with him. When this was all over, the minister said god now needed money for his generosity. All about money, nothing else. Funny, you don’t see these types of guys in the corridors of hospitals, healing the sick and wounded. 
 I studied science and mathematics at school and college and took a keen interest in both. The more I studied science, the more I could debunk god, the dumber the existence of god became. I read Charles Darwin’s “on the origins of species  which became my bible. Then my dad got me the book “Cosmos  by Carl Sagan for my nineteenth birthday. I bought the book, “a demon haunted world  too. I read most of Richard Dawkins books. I particularly enjoyed “The god delusion , and more. The bible doesn’t have a place in my home. 
 My kids were all raised as free thinkers, taught to use and apply their minds and never worship anything higher than themselves. 
 We are all creationists as man created god. 
 To me, being an atheist allows me to see the world for what it is. If there is something I would like to know, I read up about it. 
 Remember, if you claim that a god exists, the onus is upon you to prove it, not be to disprove it. 
 You, believing that there is only one god, makes you an atheist too. I just believe in one less god than you do. 
 You may be surprised to hear that I have a lot of sympathy for your position. If I had grown up in most of the Christian churches that I’m aware of, I probably would have become an atheist too. I also love science and rational thinking. The unscientific and irrational beliefs I would be required to accept in those churches would have been entirely unacceptable to me–not to mention some of the horrible teachings about God. 
 However, I grew up in a church that valued science, rationality, and intellect along with spiritual understanding, and that saw no conflict between good science and genuine religion. And so, when in my teenage years I faced the choice of whether or not to believe in God, a belief in God made much more sense to me, and also seemed more likely to lead to what is good and right in human society. 
 I do understand your position. Many irrational and false beliefs are promulgated in the name of Christ, and of religion in general. And many wars have been fought, and people oppressed, in the name of Christ and of religion in general. If I saw the sort of religion and belief in God that leads to these things as real religion, I would reject it too. 
 But I don’t. 
 All of that irrational belief and destructive action is based on false religion, and false concepts of God. And unfortunately, when the best and highest parts of human life become corrupted, they become the worst and most horrific–similar to how marriage at its best is a relationship in which there is great happiness and joy, but at its worst it brings about some of the greatest pain and suffering known to humankind. 
 That’s how it is with religion and belief in God. At its best it is sublime and beautiful; at its worst it is horrible and oppressive. 
 I will not try to dissuade you from your atheism. You seem to have arrived at it by an honest rejection of irrational doctrines. And I respect that. 
 However, if you feel free to think of me as an atheist who just happens to have rejected one less god than you have, I’ll feel free to think of you as a theist who just happens to believe in some of the qualities of God rather than in the name of God. 
 Some of the qualities of God are truth, goodness, reason, intelligence, thoughtfulness, and a desire for the good of humankind. These, I think and hope, you believe in. Therefore to me you are not an atheist, because in your heart you believe in the things that God truly is, even if you do not believe intellectually in the concept of God. 
 Lee, I was listening to a show on the radio today, which prompt me to write this letter, where we have the tomb and treasures for the ancient Egyptian Tutankhamun in Johannesburg, where I live. Now the guest on the radio was the famous, Zahi Hawass, who is an expert on ancient Egypt and Egyptolog. He was explaining that they have done DNA testing on the mummies and artifacts from the burial sites. He went further to explain how Tut died and the ritual that they went through for these guys to get to the afterlife. Osiris was the god of the afterlife, but look how many other gods there were; 
 So it was fine for these Egyptians to believe in these gods, as did the Greeks have their gods and so did the Romans, but when Jesus arrived, he superseded all of these gods? 
 Lee, you don’t need to believe in the bible, nor be a religious person to be a good person. Common sense tells me this. There only needs to be one commandment; try not to be an idiot. 
 If we look back at religion, it has brought more death and destruction than anything else. 
 I stay in Johannesburg, South Africa. I have had the opportunity to travel this vast continent of ours, the cradle of human kind. I have seen poverty and devastation on unimaginable scale. You must try telling these young kids who are starving to death, where you see them with their pot bellies and ribs sticking out, the famous photo of the vulture standing not to far away from a dying child, that god loves them. That doesn’t wash with them. Best, try figure that one out yourself, what a wonderful god you have. 
 I like your commandment! But I would take some of the wiggle room out and state it like this: 
 Don’t be an idiot. 
 Fewer excuses that way. 😉 
 About wars, starving children, and the other terrible evils in our world, I don’t understand why we blame God for things we ourselves are responsible for. If God created human beings with rationality and free will, shouldn’t we be looking at ourselves for the cause of the evils and injustices in our world, and not blaming God? Most of the poverty and starvation in the world is political. It is caused by human greed and grasping for power–which is diametrically opposed to God’s will. 
 Our human conceptions of God or gods are not the same thing as God. God (from a theist perspective) is a real entity that has definite characteristics independent of human ideas about God. 
 As a parallel, the sun exists independently of our ideas of what it is. Whether we think it is a god carried across the sky in a chariot or a huge ball of fire or a nuclear furnace, the sun itself doesn’t change. Only our idea of the sun changes. 
 About whether you need to believe the Bible or be a religious person to be a good person, you might be interested in my most recent post: “Do Atheists Go to Heaven?  
 I Guess you are right . There is one supreme power , but our organs sense them in different way , different look . Every soul irrespective of religion meet this supreme power after living his life in this earth. 
 My favorite theologian, Emanuel Swedenborg, is one place where science and spirit meet. I grew up loving both science and spirituality. I see no conflict between them. If both are understood well and deeply, each one supports the other. 
 I take all the confusion and disagreement about who/what/where God is as evidence that there is no actual God. It seems to me that if an actual object is real, there should be a general agreement. 
 I think of it more like a square. A square by definition is: “(geometry) a plane rectangle with four equal sides and four right angles; a four-sided regular polygon . There can be no disagreements over what the angles in a square are or how many sides it has. 
 If God existed, would not all of us, or at least most, agree on what God is or what he/she/it wants? 
 I do understand why many skeptics and atheists take the widespread disagreement about who and what God is to be evidence that there is no God. 
 If God were as simple as a square, it would indeed be strange for people to disagree about God’s nature. But God is infinitely more complex than a square. 
 In terms of a two-dimensional figure, I would suggest that a Rorschach inkblot would be a better analogy. Different people look at the very same image, and come up with very different ideas about what it pictures. And yet, it exists, and it is still the same image no matter who’s looking at it. 
 even though we we have different religions just believing in GOD will get you to heaven 
 I know that it has been a long time since this article was posted, but I have been having a lot of trouble with faith for the past few years. I was/am being raised Catholic (I am currently in high school), but the past few years have been hard. My family stopped going to church due to problems in our family, but my mom and her side of the family are still devote Catholics. I hit and am still dealing with a hard point in my life, and a few years ago began to question life, God, religion, and heaven. Granted, I have not read the Bible and I do not know everything about my religion, but from generalizations and the things I did/do know about my religion, I noticed that I had some differing views. I love science and have been trying to find a middle between science and faith. I have so far found no one that has the same views as I do, even though I thought I came to a good conclusion. To sum it up, I do believe in a supreme being, and I also believe that just because I do not believe in exactly what is taught that I can still go to Heaven. I do believe in science, the Big Bang Theory, evolution, etc. but I believe that there must be something/someone that created the first particle, or atom, or space, that had a vision or a plan for what it would become. This post is helping me to see that there are other people (who have commented above) who have similar beliefs and that I am not alone in my thoughts. I believe that as long as you believe and have faith in God, as well as lead a good life, no matter what religion, race, or sexuality, you can go to Heaven and have a relationship with God. I feel like every religion is right in its own way, and that people should not be against other religions because they don’t believe in the exact same things. Even though I still sometimes question God and Heaven, I am starting to come to a consensus on my beliefs and that they are similar to others. Thank you for posting this article, and thank you other commenters for allowing me to nod my head up and down and say “Exactly!  to some of your posts! ❤ 🙂 
 Thanks for your thoughts! You’re living in a challenging time–when you have to start making up your own mind about what you believe and how you will live, even if that might be a little different than the way your parents or your church have taught you. And yet, the important thing is to come to a belief and a way of life that works for you, and inspires you to become your best self. 
 I’m glad this article, and the comments on it, are helpful to you. I invite you to poke around the site a little more. Maybe some of the other articles will hit the mark for you as well. In particular, since you say you are interested in science but still want to be able to believe in God, you might be interested in this article: Can We Really Believe the Bible? 
 If you have any questions along the way, feel free to ask in a comment. Or you’re welcome to submit a spiritual conundrum if you have a real toughie! 🙂 
 Meanwhile, good luck on your thoughts and ponderings. From what you say here, I think you have a good spirit, and will do good things with your life. 
 Gianna, perhaps you have considered them already, but here are two interesting web sites dealing with reconciling science and Christianity. The first are Old Age Creationists, the second are Theistic Evolutions: 
 Just to be clear for those reading in: These links have no connection to the beliefs behind Spiritual Insights for Everyday Life. But they do look interesting. 
 That was an awesome post. Now i have a question. Before that, i’ll tell you, neither im a religious person nor i believe in jesus or any other gods. Instead i found my own goddess in something and in my heart. I worship her just as christians does to jesus or other religious people. Do you think i’ll find my goddess in heaven because i want to stay with her forever even after i die, i want to take care of her forever. Another question pops up my mind that why people consider god as he..Why not she? Why not it? 
 Thanks for stopping by, and for your comment and question. 
 Different people see and experience God in different ways. People of Western religions most commonly see and experience God as male. Christians especially tend to see God as male because Jesus was male. However many people of Eastern religions also see and experience God as female. 
 From my perspective, neither is right or wrong. Both male and female come from God and are present in God. On this subject, you might enjoy this article: The Mother of All the Living 
 If you think of and experience God as female, I see no reason why you could not continue to experience God as female in the spiritual world and in heaven. 
 Thinking of God as an “it  does seem problematic because it depersonalizes God. In other words, it makes God a thing instead of a human being who has love, understanding, compassion, wisdom, and all of the other truly human attributes that we small human beings have from God because we are created in the image and likeness of God (see Genesis 1:26-27). 
 Whether we see God as male or female is less important than whether we see God as human so that we can have a real and mutual relationship with God. 
 What about “I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me?  Jesus, who was God, said that he was the way not one way. Who could this be misunderstood? 
 Thanks for stopping by, and for your good question. 
 As I explain briefly in this article, if Jesus was God, then everyone who believes in God is, in fact, believing in Jesus, whether or not they realize they are believing in Jesus. For a longer and more in-depth answer to your question, please see the article, “Is Jesus Christ the Only Way to Heaven?  
 Hi Lee! I enjoyed reading some of your responses above. How does Swedenborg deal with people in other religions whose religion does not lead them to love? For example, radical extremists who believe that their God wants them to kill unbelievers or people in remote villages who still believe in child sacrifice? Will God honor their sincerity to their religion? It seems that some people will definitely NOT be saved by following the tenets of their particular faith. 
 I’m glad you’re enjoying the articles and comments here. Great question! 
 If a person sincerely believes that God requires the killing of unbelievers, child sacrifice, and other practices that are horrific from our present-day Western perspective, then yes, that person will be saved by following those practices as commanded by his or her religion. Keep in mind that in the Bible itself, primarily in the Old Testament, God’s people were commanded to slaughter their enemies–sometimes men, women, and children alike–and were commended for doing so, and punished if they didn’t do so. 
 However, this does not provide cover for people to do horrible things in the name of religion. I simply do not believe that the leaders of ISIS are just good but misunderstood Muslims who sincerely believe that they must indiscriminately slaughter everyone in their path, sell women into sexual slavery, and so on. They are out for power, pure and simple. They are using the cover of religion to justify their territorial ambitions and desire to rule over others with a ruthless and merciless hand. The same could be said of the “Christian  crusades and wars of previous centuries–and probably many of them today as well. 
 Further, even someone who sincerely believes in practices that are in fact evil in God’s sight cannot continue to engage in them forever. If not before, then when they reach the afterlife they will be taught that these practices are evil, not good, and are contrary to God’s will. Then, if they were sincerely doing them out of a belief that this is what God wanted, when they learn that this is not what God wants, they will willingly cease to do such things, and learn and practice what God does want–which is to love their neighbor. 
 If instead they continue to do (or attempt to do) those evil things even when they have been taught by angels that these practices are wrong, they will find their final home in hell, not heaven, because they were in fact doing them from selfish greed and ambition rather than from a sincere desire to obey God’s will as they understood it. 
 Ideally, they will see the light here on earth rather than in the afterlife. And I suppose all of us have our blind spots that cause us to do things that we think are good, but are actually evil. 
 The easiest answer is you believe what you would like to believe, I’ll believe what I’d like to believe and put my faith in what I think is true and you can put faith in what you think is true and in the end when we pass on, that’s when we’ll all find out who’s right and who’s wrong. For all those that believe there are many paths to heaven or those that believe there’s only one path to heaven that’s a decision based on all the information we have available to us that we have to make. Please excuse all the grammatical errors as I am utilizing talk to text ! 👌👍😄 
 (Click the cover image or title link to review or purchase. This website receives commissions from purchases made via its links to Amazon.) 

 id="file23242809" filename="important-birth-rites-rituals-hinduism" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.sanskritimagazine.com/indian-religions/hinduism/important-birth-rites-rituals-hinduism/">
 Important Birth Rites and Rituals in Hinduism 
 Special ceremonies are performed before the baby is born for the welfare of the mother and child. The family priest or pundit will come to the family’s home to perform various rites. 
 In Hindu dharma, the birth of a child is considered a religious activity. Samskaras begin prior to birth and end with the cremation of the body following death. The number of samskaras prescribed in various scriptures vary from eleven to forty, some of the most significant samskars are :- 
 Garbhadhana (conception) Jatakarma (child birth) Namakarana (naming a child) Annaprasana (giving the child solid food) Mundan (shaving the head) Upanayana (sacred thread ceremony) 
 Garbhadhana 
 The rite through which a man placed his seed in a woman was called Garbhadhana. Saunaka gives the similar definition though in slightly different words; “The rite by the performance of which a woman receives semen scattered (by her husband) is call Garbhalambhanam or Garbhadhana.  In Vedic culture spiritual aspirants can get married. For them marriage is a partnership to aid them in their mutual progress in spiritual life, marriage is not simply a for sexual gratification. One of the duties of such a married couple is to produce spiritually enlightened children. Bringing such spiritually aware children into the world is beneficial both for the parents spiritually, as well as for society in general. The conception of such great children is a great science and not the mere byproduct of random recreational intercourse on the part of the parents.Unlike ordinary sexual activity which further binds the soul’s of all involved into material consciousness, the Garbhadhana Samskara is a purely spiritual act as is confirmed by Lord Krishna in the Bhagavad-gita 7.11. Such sex aimed at creating godly children is as good as God Himself. 
 “I am the strength of the strong, devoid of passion and desire. I am sex life which is not contrary to religious principles, O lord of the Bharatas [Arjuna].  
 Jatakarma 
 The jatakarma ceremony welcomes the baby into the world. The father places a small amount of ghee and honey on the baby’s tongue and whispers the name of God in his ear. During this Sanskar, the father feeds honey to the baby and pierces the baby’s ear. This ear piercing is supposed to enhance the memory of the child .Brahmins chant Mantras for a healthy, long life of the child. This Sanskar is restricted to the family level. 
 Namakarana 
 In Namakarana ceremony the child is given a name.Nama literally means ‘name’ and karana means ‘to make, to effect’. All the activities in the world are carried on the basis of name. Every parent has the duty to give a nice name to the child, which reminds the child of some goal or objective in the life. It is very important to select a nice name for the child; the name should be meaningful which fulfills all the desires of the child. Whenever the child hears the name he will remember the meaning and purpose hidden in it and will be inspired by its meaning.Distribution of sweets to everybody. Afterwards a feast is usually arranged. 
 Annaprasana 
 This sanskar is related to the time when the child is to be given solid food apart from the mother’s milk. This emphasizes the importance of proper health care and nutrition for the child.Time for performance: In the 6th, 8th or 10th month for the male child and 5th, 7th, 9th or 11th month for the female child. The object of this ceremony is to pray to the gods with Vedic Mantras to bless the child with good digestive powers, good thoughts and talents. It is performed when the child is six months old which is the weaning time. Susruta commends this weaning time as best for both the mother and the child. Offerings are made to the goddess of speech and vigour. Prayers are offered so that the child´s senses have their full gratification and live a happy and contented life. The father feeds a little of the sweet food anointed with gold to the child with Mantras that say he feeds the child with food that may ensure a healthy life to the child and prevent ill-health. Apart from the efficacy or otherwise of this ceremony, its observance creates in all concerned an awareness of the cumulative needs of the child at that age in a scientific and tender manner. Its systematic observance therefore ensures the results expected especially when fortified by Mantras. 
 The Annaprashana ceremony should be performed at the time when the child gains strength to digest cereal and preparations made from cereals. The first feeding of cereal commences with this ceremony. He who desires his child to be brilliant and famous should feed cooked rice mixed with ghee (clarified butter) or the rice mixed with honey, curd and ghee . The samskar ceremony for the first feeding commences with prayer, followed by Svastivachana, Shanitkarana and complete Samanya Prakarana. It is indicated that this ceremony should be performed (when the child is six months old) on the day on which the child was born. 
 The rice should be prepared as below: Rice is washed, cleaned, cooked nicely and ghee in proper quantity is mixed in the rice when it is in the cooking process. When this rice has been cooked properly and has become cold, then it should be placed in Homasthali or the tray of Homa. From this Homashali the rice is then given in small containers to the Yajman, to Purohita and Ritvij (Priests), accompanied with chanting of Mantras.The Yajmana (father of the child) then performs Agnyadhan and Samidadhana. Offers four oblations of Aghavarajyabhagahuti and four oblations of Vyahriti. Thereafter the oblation of the cooked rice that was given to the Yajman and to the priests, should be offered with one Mantras from the Rig Veda and one Mantra from the Yajur Veda. Thereafter the Yajmana mixes small quantity of curd, honey and ghee. Adds this to the rice that remained after the oblations. This should be fed to the child in minute quantity according to the desire of the child with the chanting of Mantra from the Yajurveda. 
 Mundan 
 Mundan Vidhi is performed to carry out the first hair cut of the baby. If it is carried out as per the Vedic Method it removes any deficiencies developed in the child before birth.It is also said that the shaving of the hair stimulates proper growth of the brain and nerves. During this vidhi all the hair of the baby are removed and the baby’s head is cleanly shaven.Hair collected during the hair cut are kept inbetween two puris ( fried indian bread ) and then offered to holy waters like Ganges, Yamuna or any other holy water bed. 
 Upanayana 
 In Hinduism, Upanayana, or ceremony to mark stages in the life of a Hindu. It is a religious ceremony undertaken by Hindu boys of the three highest castes. The ceremony usually takes place between the ages 7 and 11, indicating the entry into adulthood and the ability to deepen the individual’s awareness of the duties they now embrace as a Hindu. During the ceremony, a sacred thread is tied. The thread is made up of three separate threads, each with a symbolic meaning – one meaning to worship God, one meaning to show love and respect to parents, and one meaning to learn from the religious teacher. Mantras from the Hindu scripture the Rig Veda are used during the ceremony. The ceremony may end with the boy acting out his departure on religious pilgrimage, re-enacting the ways of those in the past who set out to study under the tuition of a religious guide. 
 The last two karmas do not apply for girls. What are rituals specifically meant for Girls? Thanks 
 As per my knowledge received through grand parents,Upanayana was performed for girls also.I don’t think elders would mislead the younger generation.Or is it a small GSB community that conducted girls Upanayana? 
 I may be wrong, but i never heard or saw any girl child going through the “Upanayana  Sanskar ; and as per my knowledge different sanskars are meant for different genders but it’s a good point to the note and either website shall provide the answer or we shall search and share. 
 Girls have this sans kar performed.I am a Vedic priest and have performed this sans kar for a girl. 
 upanayana is for ALL VARNAS other than shudras. It was a comprehensive social model. Today, we can’t even understand those things properly and blame the caste system. We are actually going into dark ages. 
 my girl baby born on 11 December 2015 we are confused the date of annaprasana.please reply 

 id="file23242725" filename="index" parent_folder="corpus" url="http://ictphx.org/index">
 The Institute Of Catholic Theology 
 Strengthening Christian Discipleship through Intellectual Formation 
 Offering Undergraduate and Graduate Theology with Franciscan University of Steubenville 
 The Institute of Catholic Theology and Franciscan University of Steubenville have entered into an innovative partnership that offers undergraduate and graduate theology to the faithful of the Diocese of Phoenix. In addition to credits being accepted at GCU, ASU, and NAU, participants will be able to work towards a Certificate in Catholic Apologetics and a Graduate Certificate in Catholic Theology, with credits fully transferable to Franciscan University. 
 The Institute of Catholic Theology…is a unique opportunity…I don’t know anything else like the ICT in the whole country…we are privileged to be partnering at the St. Paul center with Dr. Westby, and all of the students and teachers here at the ICT. 
 Dr. Scott Hahn, November 16, 2019, SW Biblical Conference IV 
 All-Access Pass Spring 2022 
 Fall 2022 
 Diocesan Recertification Hours 
 Work towards your recertification on your time, at your pace, in your place, taking subjects that interest you. Upon course completion, receive a certificate with your name and the number continuing education hours right on it! 
 About Us 
 The Institute of Catholic Theology provides continuing education for adult Catholics. Founded in 2009, the ICT offers a wide variety of courses, both live and archived on the internet, that can be taken at your leisure. Whether you are new to adult education or are looking to delve into the richness of Catholic Intellectual tradition, these courses are designed to strengthen one's Christian discipleship through intellectual formation. 
 Subscribe to Our Mailing List 
 * indicates required 
 Email Address * 
 First Name * 
 Last Name * 
 Welcome from our Director 
 Welcome to the Institute of Catholic Theology. It is our pleasure to serve you. Our goal at the Institute is to help strengthen your life in Christ through intellectual formation. In Romans 12:2, St. Paul urges us to “be transformed by the renewal of your mind, that you may prove what is the will of God, what is good and acceptable and perfect.  Our hope here is that we can assist you in that process. We offer conferences, live courses, online courses and in-person support for those in Franciscan University of Steubenville’s online Masters of Theology and the Masters of Catechetics and Evangelization programs. So whether you are new to the faith or a veteran, we are here to support. 
 In the meantime, sign up for my Weekly Scripture Reflections, meant to help you prepare for the Sunday Gospels. There’s no charge - just sign up and they will come right to your email! 
 All-Access Pass Spring 2022 
 Seminars in Catholic Theology. The Constitutions of Vatican II: Sacrosanctum Concilium 
 First Saturdays with the Saints: Blessed Bartolo Longo 
 Saturday Morning Lecture Series 
 Vatican II Decrees and Declarations: Eastern Rite Churches, Catholic Education, Bishops Presenters: Nicole Delaney and Sr. Johanna Paruch, FSGM, PhD 
 Seminars in Catholic Theology. The Constitutions of Vatican II: Lumen Gentium 
 There are two primary thrusts to the Catholic Church's efforts to evangelize the world by sharing the good news that God has revealed through His Son, Our Lord, Jesus Christ. 
 While the first is to spread the Gospel among those who do not yet believe in Jesus Christ, the second is referred to as the "New Evangelization." Rooted in the wealth of Blessed Pope John Paul II 's teaching, it challenges Catholics today to not only reach out to the uncatechized, but to deepen their own knowledge, practice and witness to the faith. 
 With classes that are open to Catholics and non-Catholics, the Institute offers instruction in Catholic theology on a broad range of topics, which are taught by highly qualified instructors. 
 While these classes are of special assistance to catechists youth ministers and Catholic school teachers, they are offered on an undergraduate level that is intended to reach the average layperson. I also wish to affirm my confidence in the faithfulness of the instructors to the Magisterium of the Church. 
 As courses provided by the Institute have been recorded and are now being made available over the Internet, I wish to affirm my support of the Institute and assure those who are interested in taking advantage of this on line resource that I fully endorse this catechetical effort. 

 id="file23242528" filename="it-true-god-blesses-those-who-bless-israel-and-curses-those-who-curse-israel" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.ligonier.org/posts/it-true-god-blesses-those-who-bless-israel-and-curses-those-who-curse-israel/">
 Is It True That God Blesses Those Who Bless Israel and Curses Those Who Curse Israel? 
 One of the first promises in the Bible is given to Abram, whom God appointed to be a blessing to the whole earth. Not only did God tell this patriarch that he would receive a good land and have many children, but He also promised Abram, “I will bless those who bless you, and him who dishonors you I will curse  (Gen. 12:1–3). That’s an incredible promise, isn’t it? God will favor those who favor Abram and set Himself against those who oppose Abram. 
 Like me, you probably want God’s blessing and favor on your life. This verse gives us the secret to obtaining that blessing. We just need to bless Abram. Abram, later renamed Abraham, died some four thousand years ago. So, one might think that it is no longer possible to bless him. That is not the case. The promise to Abraham was passed down through his son Isaac to his grandson Jacob (Gen. 27:1–29). Jacob, of course, was renamed Israel, his sons being the founding fathers of the tribes of Israel. So, the promise of Abraham passed on to Israel as well (Num. 24:1–9). 
 So, God is going to bless those who bless Abraham, which means He is going to bless those who bless Israel. And this promise was never withdrawn. It must come to pass, which means it is still in force today. But does the Israel of God exist today? 
 From a biblical perspective, the Israel of God does still exist. But here is where things get perhaps a little tricky, for in today’s world there is a nation-state named Israel that is occupying much of the geography that the Old Testament refers to as the promised land. So, this must mean that if we want God’s blessing, we have to do good to the modern nation of Israel by supporting everything that nation does, right? 
 Not exactly. You see, the Bible is also clear that the Israel of God is not any modern nation-state and that it is not made up of one people group. The Israel of God is Jesus Christ and all those who are united to Him by faith alone. Referring to the young Jesus’ return to the promised land after the death of Herod the Great, Matthew quotes the prophet Hosea, who said “Out of Egypt I called my son  (Matt. 2:15). This quote comes from Hosea 11:1, where Hosea is referring to the nation of Israel. Essentially, Matthew is saying that the true son of God named Israel is none other than Jesus the Messiah. Similarly, in John 15:1, Jesus says, “I am the true vine.  Every Jew who heard Him would have remembered the many places in the Old Testament where Israel is referred to as God’s vine or God’s vineyard (e.g., Isa. 5:1–7; Jer. 6:9; Hos. 10:1). Jesus’ point is clear: because He is the true vine, He is the true Israel of God. 
 But the Israel of God is not Jesus alone. It’s also all those who trust in Him alone for salvation. Turning to Romans 11, we find the Apostle Paul explaining why so many Jews—Israel according to the flesh—do not believe Jesus is the Messiah while so many gentiles do. Paul likens Israel, the people of God, to an olive tree and notes that those who are part of the tree by birth—the natural branches, the Jews—can be broken off by their unbelief in Christ, and those who were not part of the tree by birth—wild branches of a different tree, the gentiles—can be grafted in to the olive tree of Israel and become part of that tree. Faith in Christ, then, is what makes a person a member of the Israel of God, not mere ethnic descent. Paul confirms this elsewhere in Galatians 6:16, where he calls the Galatian church—made up predominantly of gentiles who believed in Jesus—as “the Israel of God.  The true Israel of God, then, consists of Christ and all the Jews and gentiles who believe in Him. 
 Blessing the Israel of God, therefore, does not mean supporting every policy of the modern nation-state of Israel. There may be good political reasons to support many of the modern nation-state’s policies, but Genesis 12:3 does not provide a theological reason to do so. And of course, Christians are called to do good to all people and to take the gospel to both Jews and gentiles (Rom. 1:16; Gal. 6:10). But blessing the Israel of God means, in this new covenant era, blessing the church of Christ—supporting its work, doing good to its people, striving for its peace and purity, and so forth. God will bless those who bless His people, the church. 

 id="file23242619" filename="jesus-blesses-little-children-248723" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.learnreligions.com/jesus-blesses-little-children-248723">
 Austin Cline, a former regional director for the Council for Secular Humanism, writes and lectures extensively about atheism and agnosticism. 
 13 And they brought young children to him, that he should touch them: and his disciples rebuked those that brought them. 14 But when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto them, Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God. 15 Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein. 16 And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed them. 
 Jesus on Children and Faith 
 Modern imagery of Jesus commonly has him sitting with children and this particular scene, repeated in both Matthew and Luke, is a primary reason why. Many Christians feel that Jesus has a special relationship with children because of their innocence and their willingness to trust. 
 It is possible that Jesus’ words are meant to further encourage his followers to be receptive to powerlessness rather than seeking power — that would be consistent with earlier passages. It is not, however, how Christians have usually interpreted this and I’ll confine my remarks to the traditional reading of this as praising innocent and unquestioning faith. 
 Should unbounded trust really be encouraged? In this passage Jesus doesn’t simply promote childlike faith and trust in children themselves but also in adults by declaring that no one will be able to enter the kingdom of God unless they “receive  it as a child — something most theologians have read to mean that those who wish to enter heaven must have the faith and trust of a child. 
 One problem is that most children are naturally inquisitive and skeptical. They may be inclined to trust adults in many ways, but they are also prone to continually ask “why  — that is, after all, the best way for them to learn. Should such natural skepticism really be discouraged in favor of blind faith? 
 Even a general trust in adults is probably misplaced. Parents in modern society have had to learn to teach their children to be mistrustful of strangers — not talking to them and not going off with them. Even adults who are known by children can abuse their authority and harm the children entrusted into their care, a situation which religious leaders are certainly not immune to. 
 The Roles of Faith and Trust 
 If faith and trust are necessary for entering heaven while doubt and skepticism are impediments to it, it is arguable that heaven may not be a goal worth striving for. Giving up skepticism and doubt is a definite harm to both children and adults. People should be encouraged to think critically, doubt what they are told, and examine claims with a skeptical eye. They should not be to told to abandon questioning or to give up on doubting. 
 Any religion which needs its adherents to be unskeptical is not a religion that can be regarded very highly. A religion which has something positive and worthwhile to offer people is a religion that can stand up to doubt and meet the challenges of skeptics. For a religion to discourage questioning is to admit that there is something to hide. 
 As to the “blessing  that Jesus gives the children here, it probably shouldn’t be read simply in a literal way. The Old Testament is a long record of God cursing and blessing the nation of Israel, with the “blessing  being a way to help the Jews develop a prosperous, stable social environment. More than likely this scene was meant as a reference to God’s blessings upon Israel — but now, Jesus himself is doing the blessing and only to those who meet certain requirements in terms of beliefs and attitudes. This is quite different from the earlier divine blessings which were predicated primarily upon being a member of the Chosen People. 
 Cline, Austin. "Jesus Blesses Little Children (Mark 10:13-16)." Learn Religions, Feb. 8, 2021, learnreligions.com/jesus-blesses-little-children-248723. Cline, Austin. (2021, February 8). Jesus Blesses Little Children (Mark 10:13-16). Retrieved from https://www.learnreligions.com/jesus-blesses-little-children-248723 Cline, Austin. "Jesus Blesses Little Children (Mark 10:13-16)." Learn Religions. https://www.learnreligions.com/jesus-blesses-little-children-248723 (accessed January 20, 2022). 
 Your Privacy Rights 
 Learn Religions and our third-party partners use cookies and process personal data like unique identifiers based on your consent to store and/or access information on a device, display personalized ads and for content measurement, audience insight, and product development. To change or withdraw your consent choices for LearnReligions.com, including your right to object where legitimate interest is used, click below. At any time, you can update your settings through the "EU Privacy" link at the bottom of any page. These choices will be signaled globally to our partners and will not affect browsing data. List of Partners (vendors) 
 We and our partners process data to: 
 Actively scan device characteristics for identification. Use precise geolocation data. Store and/or access information on a device. Select personalised content. Create a personalised content profile. Measure ad performance. Select basic ads. Create a personalised ads profile. Select personalised ads. Apply market research to generate audience insights. Measure content performance. Develop and improve products. List of Partners (vendors) 

 id="file23242793" filename="joe-biden-religion-faith" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://heavy.com/news/joe-biden-religion-faith/">
 President-Elect Joe Biden will be the second Catholic President of the United States. Biden has sometimes exchanged jabs with President Donald Trump about topics like faith and religion. Biden was raised in an Irish-Catholic family and he has said that his beliefs are still very important to him. 
 Here’s what you need to know about his religious beliefs and his faith. 
 1. Biden Said His Faith Helped Get Him Through Tragedies, But He Nearly Lost His Faith When His First Wife & Daughter Were Killed 
 My faith implores me to embrace a preferential option for the poor and, as president, I will do everything in my power to fight poverty and build a future that moves us closer to our highest ideals—not only that all women and men are created equal in the eyes of God, but that they are treated equally by their fellow man. 
 Jesus Christ is the human embodiment of what God wanted us to do. Everything Jesus did was sort of consistent with what generically we were supposed to do: treat people with dignity. 
 During an interview with Stephen Colbert, Biden said that his faith and his Catholic rituals helped him deal with tragedies in his life, such as losing his son, Beau Biden, to brain cancer in 2015, the Christian Post reported. The rituals gave him an enormous sense of solace, he said. 
 But in 2012 he has also admitted that he struggled with anger at God after his first wife and his daughter were killed in a car wreck in 1972, Christian Today reported. He said he would get angry at God and think there was just no way that God could possibly be good. He said that he understood why some people turned to suicide, not because they were crazy, but because “they had been to the top of the mountain, and they just knew in their heart they would never get there again.  
 Biden’s wife, Jill Biden, also struggled with faith — for her it was following her stepson Beau Biden’s death, People reported. She said that up until he died, she always had believed he would somehow make it. Beau Biden was only 46 when he died. 
 Jill Biden wrote in her memoir: “Where I once felt that peace that surpasses understanding, I now feel hollow silence. One day, I hope I can salvage my faith.  
 She later said that she did find her faith again. She said a woman came up to her in South Carolina at church when she and Biden were campaigning and asked to be her prayer partner. She said that woman helped give her back her faith. 
 2. After Trump Accused Him of Being ‘Against God,’ Biden Shared that His Faith Is the Foundation of His Life 
 Getty 
 In August, Trump accused Biden of being “against God,  The Hill reported. Trump said during a speech about Biden: “Take away your guns, take away your Second Amendment. No religion, no anything. Hurt the Bible. Hurt God. He’s against God. He’s against guns. He’s against energy.  
 Biden said Trump’s comments were beneath his office. He told The Hill: “it’s beneath the dignity the American people so rightly expect and deserve from their leaders… However, like the words of so many other insecure bullies, President Trump’s comments reveal more about him than they do about anyone else. They show us a man willing to stoop to any low for political gain, and someone whose actions are completely at odds with the values and teachings that he professes to believe in.  
 Biden went on to share that his faith kept him grounded “and humbled in times of triumph and joy.  He said his faith provided him comfort and taught him to love his neighbors. 
 “My faith teaches me to care for the least among us,  he told The Hill. 
 3. In 2012 He Said that He Doesn’t Believe in Using the Law to Impose His Religious Beliefs on Others 
 Getty 
 During the vice-presidential debates in 2012, he said that his religion “defines who I am,  National Review reported. He said: 
 And I’ve been a practicing Catholic my whole life. And it has particularly informed my social doctrine. Catholic social doctrine talks about taking care of those who — who can’t take care of themselves, people who need help.  
 He also said that he does not believe in using the law to force people of different faiths to conform to his beliefs. He also said during the debates: 
 With regard to abortion, I accept my church’s position on abortion as a — what we call de fide doctrine. Life begins at conception. That’s the Church’s judgment. I accept it in my personal life. But I refuse to impose it on equally devout Christians and Muslims and Jews and — I just refuse to impose that on others, unlike my friend here, the congressman. 
 4. Biden Once Considered Becoming a Priest 
 Getty 
 When Biden was young, he briefly considered becoming a priest, Pew Forum reported. He was a student at Holy Rosary parochial school and Archmere Academy. He started developing an interest in politics in 10th grade when he studied John F. Kennedy, who was also a Catholic. 
 Biden usually attends Mass at St. Joseph on the Brandywine Church or St. Patrick’s Church in the Diocese of Wilmington, Pew Forum reported. If elected, he would be only the second Catholic president, following John F. Kennedy. 
 Politico reported that Biden is known to carry rosary beads in his pocket on the campaign trail. 
 5. His Wife Is a Big Encourager of His Faith 
 Getty 
 Two of Biden’s children married into Jewish families. His daughter, Ashley Biden, married Howard Krein, a Jewish doctor, in 2012. They were married in an interfaith Jewish-Catholic ceremony, Haaretz reported. 
 His son who passed away, Beau Biden, was married to Hallie Biden, who also comes from a Jewish family. She was raised in both the Christian and Catholic faiths, and her mother is Jewish, Times of Israel reported. 
 Hunter Biden, Joe Biden’s son, began dating Hallie Biden after Beau’s death. Joe Biden said that he and his wife Jill were standing by them. Hunter and Hallie are no longer together and Hunter married Melissa Cohen after divorcing Kathleen Biden in 2017. 
 Biden has said that meeting and marrying Jill Biden helped pull him back from the brink after his first wife and his daughter died. She still encourages his faith, he told Stephen Colbert during an interview in 2015. For example, he said that Jill will often leave him inspirational notes. One of them was a quote that simply read: “Faith sees best in the dark.  
 You can see Biden’s full interview with Colbert in the two videos below. 
 Play Vice President Joe Biden Interview, Part 1Part one of Vice President Joe Biden's full interview with Stephen Colbert. Subscribe To "The Late Show" Channel HERE: bit.ly/ColbertYouTube For more content from "The Late Show with Stephen Colbert", click HERE: bit.ly/1AKISnR Watch full episodes of "The Late Show" HERE: bit.ly/1Puei40 Download the Colbert App HERE: apple.co/1Qqgwk4 Like "The Late Show" on Facebook HERE:…2015-09-11T07:35:00Z 
 Play Vice President Joe Biden Interview, Part 2Part two of Vice President Joe Biden's full interview with Stephen Colbert.2015-09-11T07:35:00Z 
 More News 
 Joe Biden is a practicing Catholic who once briefly considered becoming a priest. 

 id="file23242780" filename="Kant-The-end-of-all-things.pdf" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://cpb-us-w2.wpmucdn.com/voices.uchicago.edu/dist/f/106/files/2013/02/Kant-The-end-of-all-things.pdf">
IMMANUEL KANT

Religion and Rational Theology
TRANSLATED AND EDITED BY

ALLEN W. WOOD
Yale University

GEORGE DI GIOVANNI
McGill University

;:;

CAMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY PRESS

The end ofall things

Translator's introduaion

Das Ende alter Dinge was first published in June 1794 in the Berlinische
MonatschriJt 23, pp. 495-5 22 .
By 1792 J. E. Biester, editor of the Berlinische MonatschriJt, had moved
his publication to Jena to avoid the Prussian religious censors. On April
10, 1794, Kant wrote him criticizing the political philosophy of the Hanover conservative August Rehberg and connecting it with the censorship
activities of Hermes and Hillmer, who "have taken their positions as
overseers of secondary schools and have thereby acquired influence over
the universities with respect to how and what is supposed to be taught
there." Then he abruptly ends the letter with this final paragraph: "The
essay I will send you soon is entitled 'The End of All Things,' which will
be partly plaintive and partly funny to read" (AK 11:496-7).
Having endured the difficulties with the censors in getting the Religion
published, Kant's outlook was anything but sanguine regarding the prospects for free thought and discussion of religious topics in Prussia. "The
End of All Things" is a plea for Christians to be true to what is best in
their religion by adopting a "liberal" way of thinking; but because it is a
plea directed at the Prussian religious authorities, it is one Kant expects to
fall on deaf ears. Thus it is couched in the form of a sly, bitter satire,
which approaches its political theme only indirectly.
Chiliastic imagery was common at the time. It was used not only by
enthusiasts such as Lavater, but also by rationalists, and by the French
revolutionaries in particular, who pictured themselves as ushering in a
new world by enthroning reason. Kant's aim, as usual, is to bring chiliastic
speculation within the bounds of reason. His criticism of those who would
meddle in God's affairs is a more or less open criticism of the orthodox in
Prussia, who were trying to impose their vision of religious truth by
political means. But the choice of the end of the world as his topic might
also be seen simply as a way for Kant to express an attitude of black
despair regarding the immediate prospects in Prussia for free communication and enlightened education in matters of religion.
In the essay's final pages (8:336-9), Kant rues the counterproductive
folly of those who seek to promote Christianity (a religion whose greatness
lies in the way it puts love in the service of morality) through the use of
earthly threats and rewards, since these means can only corrupt morality
219

IMMANUEL KANT

and put an end to love. It is transparent that these criticisms allude to the
projects of J. C. Wollner and his associates; hence Kant could expect this
essay only to increase the hostility the authorities had already shown
toward him.
When, on May 18, the philosopher finally transmitted to Biester the
text of "The End of All Things," he accompanied it with a resigned letter
in which he avows that he will "punctiliously obey" any laws which "command what is not opposed to my principles," or even those which "forbid
making known my principles in their entirety, as I have done up to now
(and for which I am not sorry in the least)" (AK II:240-I). These
remarks seem already to anticipate the royal reproof of his writings on
religion which he was to receive in October of that year, and which led to
Kant's promise to the King to refrain from any further writing on religious
subjects. The decision to prohibit Kant from writing on religion had been
taken by C. G. WoItersdorf, the Oberkonsistorialrath, as early as June 1791,
and this fact had been reported promptly to Kant by his former student,
the royal tutor J. G. Kiesewetter (AK 11:264-6). By 1794 the philosopher
must have known that royal action against him could not be delayed much
longer.
"The End of All Things" has been translated into English twice previously. The first translation, by Robert E. Anchor, appeared in Lewis
White Beck, Emil Fackenheim, and Robert E. Anchor (eds.), Kant on
History (New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1963). The second, by Ted Humphrey, appeared in Ted Humphrey (ed.), Perpetual Peace and Other Essays
(Indianapolis: Hackett, 1983).

220

The end ofall things

It is a common expression, used chiefly in pious language, to speak of a
person who is dying as going out of time into eternity.
This expression would in fact say nothing if eternity is understood here
to mean a time proceeding to infinity; for then the person would indeed
never get outside time but would always progress only from one time into
another. Thus what must be meant is an end of all time along with the
person's uninterrupted duration; but this duration (considering its existence as a magnitude) as a magnitude (duratio Noumenon) wholly incomparable with time, of which we are obviously able to form no concept (except
a merely negative one). This thought has something horrifYing about it
because it leads us as it were to the edge of an abyss: for anyone who sinks
into it no return is possible ("But in that earnest place/ Him who holds
nothing back! Eternity holds fast in its strong arms." Haller);r and yet
there is something attractive there too: for one cannot cease turning his
terrified gaze back to it again and again (nequeunt expleri corda tuendo.
Virgil). a It is frighteningly sublime partly because it is obscure, for the
imagination works harder in darkness than it does in bright light. Yet in
the end it must also be woven in a wondrous way into universal human
reason, because it is encountered among all reasoning peoples at all times,
clothed in one way or another. - Now when we pursue the transition from
time into eternity (whether or not this idea, considered theoretically as
extending cognition, has objective reality), as reason does in a moral
regard, then we come up against the end of all things as temporal beings
and as objects of possible experience - which end, however, in the moral
order of ends, is at the same time the beginning of a duration of just those
same beings as supersensible, and consequently as not standing under conditions of time; thus that duration and its state will be capable of no determination of its nature b other than a moral one.
Days are as it were the children of time, because the following day, with
what it contains, is an offspring of the previous one. Now just as the last
child of its parents is called the youngest child, so the German language
likes to call the last day (the point in time which closes all time) the

a

"They cannot satisty their hearts with gazing" (Virgil, Aeneid 8: 26 5).

b

Beschaffenheit

221

8:328

IMMANUEL KANT

8:329

youngest day. C The last day thus still belongs to time, for on it something or
other happens (and not to eternity, where nothing happens any more,
because that would belong to the progress of time): namely, the settling of
accounts for human beings, based on their conduct in their whole lifetime. It is ajudgment day; thus the judgment of grace or damnation by the
world's judge is therefore the real d end of all things in time, and at the
same time the beginning of the (blessed or cursed) eternity, in which the
lot that has fallen to each remains just as it was in the moment of its
pronouncement (of the sentence). Thus the last day also contains in itself
simultaneously the last judgment. - Now if among the last things there
should yet be counted the end of the world as it appears in its present
shape, namely the falling of the stars from heaven, considered as a vault,
and the collapse of this heaven itself (or its disappearance, as a scroll when
it is rolled up), 2 both being consumed in flames, with the creation of a new
earth and a new heaven as the seat of the blessed and of hell as that of the
damned,3 then that judgment day would obviously not be the last day;
instead, different days would follow upon it, one after another. Yet since
the idea of an end of all things takes its origin from reasonings not about
the physical but rather about the moral course of things in the world, and is
occasioned only by it, while the latter alone can be referred to the supersensible (which is to be understood only morally) - and it is the same
with the idea of eternity - so consequently the representation of those last
things which are supposed to come after the last day are to be regarded
only as a way of making sensible this latter together with its moral consequences, which are otherwise not theoretically comprehensible to us.
But it is to be noted that from the most ancient times there have been
two systems pertaining to the future eternity: one is that of the unitists, e
awarding eternal blessedness to all human beings (after they have been
purified by a longer or shorter penance), while the other is the system of
the dualists, * which awards blessedness to some who have been elected,
* In the ancient Persian religion (of Zoroaster), such a system was grounded on the assumption of an eternal struggle between two original beings, the good principle Ormuzd and the
evil Ahriman. - It is strange that in the naming of these two original beings the language of
two lands distant from each other, and still farther removed from the present seat of the
German language, is German. I remember reading in Sonnerat that in Ava (the land of the
Burmese) the good principle! is called "Godeman"g (which appears also to lie in the name
Darius Codomannus; and the word "Ahriman" sounds very similar to [the German for]
"wicked man"h - present day Persian also contains a lot of originally German words; so it
, }llngster Tag is the German term for what we call (the biblical) "judgment day"; this term
will be translated henceforth as "last day."
d eigentliche
, Unitarier
! Princip
g

"Godeman" sounds similar to the German "guter Mann"

h

argeMann

zzz

THE END OF ALL THINGS

but eternal damnation to all the rest. For there would probably be no room
for a system according to which all were predestined i to be damned,
because then there would be no ground which could justifY their being
created at all; but the annihilation of all would indicate a defective wisdom,
one which is dissatisfied with its own work and knows no other way of
remedying the flaws except to destroy it. - Just the same difficulty stands
in the way of the dualists as the obstacle to thinking the eternal damnation
of everyone; for why, one could ask, were even a few created - Why even a
single individual? - if he is supposed to exist only to be rejected for eternity? For that is worse than never having been at all.
Indeed, as far as we have insight into it, as far as we can investigate it
ourselves, the dualistic system (but only under one supremely good original
being) has - for the praaical aims of every human being judging himself
(though not for being warranted to judge others) - a preponderant ground
for it: for as far as he is acquainted with himself, reason leaves him no other
prospect for eternity than that which his conscience opens up for him at the
end of this life on the basis of the course of his life as he has led it up to then.
But this ground, as a judgment of mere reason, is far from sufficient for
making this into a dogma, hence a theoretical proposition which is valid in
itself (objectively). For what human being knows j himself or others through
and through? Who knows enough to decide whether if we subtract from the
causes of a presumably well-led course oflife everything which is called the
merit of fortune - such as an innately kind temperament, the naturally
greater strength of his higher powers (of the understanding and reason, to
tame his drives), besides that also his opportunity, the times when contingency fortunately saved him from many temptations which struck another who knows ifhe separates all these from his actual character (from which he
must necessarily subtract them if he is to evaluate it properly, since as gifts
of fortune he cannot ascribe them to his own merit) - who will then decide,
I say, whether before the all-seeing eye of a world-judge one human being
has any superiority over another regarding his inner moral worth? And, on
the basis of this superficial self-knowledge, k might it not perhaps be absurd
self-conceit to pronounce any judgment at all to one's own advantage
concerning one's own moral worth or that of others (or of the fates they
deserve)? - Hence the unitist's system, as much as the dualist's, considered
as dogma, seems to transcend completely the speculative faculty of human
reason; and everything brings us back to limiting those ideas of reason

might be a task for those who do research into antiquity to use the guiding thread of linguistic
affinity to inquire into the origin of the present day religious conceptions of many peoples.
(See Sonnerat's Travels, Book 4, Chapter 2, B.).
, bestimmt
) kennt
k

Selbsterkenntnis

223

8:330

IMMANUEL KANT

8:33 I

absolutely to the conditions of their practical use only. For we see nothing
before us now that could teach us about our fate in a future world except
the judgment of our own conscience, i.e. what our present moral state, as
far as we are acquainted with it, lets us judge rationally concerning it:
namely, that those principles I we have found ruling in ourselves during the
course of our life (whether they be good or evil) will continue after death,
without our having the slightest ground to assume that they will alter in
that future. Hence for eternity we would have to anticipate for ourselves
the consequences suiting that merit or guilt under the dominion of the
good or evil principle; in this respect, consequently, it is wise to act as if
another life - and the moral state in which we end this one, along with its
consequences in entering on that other life - is unalterable. Thus from a
practical point of view, m the system to be assumed will have to be the
dualistic one - especially since the unitistic system appears to lull us too
much into an indifferent sense of security - yet we might not try to make
out which of the two systems deserves superiority from a theoretical and
merely speculative point of view.
But why do human beings expect an end of the world at all? And if this
is conceded to them, why must it be a terrible end (for the greatest part of
the human race)? ... The ground of the first point appears to lie in the
fact that reason says to them that the duration of the world has worth only
insofar as the rational beings in it conform to the final end of their
existence; if, however, this is not supposed to be achieved, then creation
itself appears purposeless to them, like a play having no resolution and
affording no cognition of any rational aim. The latter point is grounded on
our opinion about the corrupt nature n of the human race, * which corrup* In all ages self-styled sages (or philosophers), without paying enough attention to the worth
of the disposition to good in human nature, have exhausted themselves in repellent, partly
disgusting parables, which represent our earthly world, the dwelling place of humanity, as
contemptible: (I) As an inn (caravansarai), as that dervish regards it, where everyone arriving
there on his life's journey must be prepared to be driven out soon by his successor; (2) as a
penitentiary - an opinion to which the Brahmanists, Tibetans and other sages of the Orient
(and even Plato) are attached - a place of chastisement and purification for fallen spirits
driven out of heaven, who are now human or animal souls; (3) as a madhouse, where each not
only annihilates his own intents, but where each adds every thinkable sorrow to the other,
and moreover holds the skill and power to do this to be the greatest honor; finally (4), as a
c/oaca, where all the excrement from the other worlds has been deposited. The latter notion
is in a certain way original, and for it we have a Persian wit to thank; he transposed paradise,
the dwelling place of the first human couple, into heaven, where there was a garden with
ample trees richly provided with splendid fruits, whose digested residue, after the couple's
enjoyment of them, vanished through an unnoticed evaporation; the exception was a single
tree in the middle of the garden, which bore a fruit which was delicious but did not dry up in
this way. As it now happened, our first parents now lusted after it, despite the prohibition
J Principien
m Absicht
" Beschaffenheit

224

THE END OF ALL THINGS

tion is great to the point of hopelessness; this makes for an end, and
indeed a terrible one, the only end (for the greatest part of humanity) that
accords with highest wisdom and justice, employing any respectable
standard. - Hence the omens ofthe last day (for where the imagination has
been excited by great expectations, how can there fail to be signs and
miracles?) are all of a terrible kind. Some see them in increasing injustice,
oppression of the poor by the arrogant indulgence of the rich, and the
general loss of fidelity and faith; or in bloody wars igniting all over the
earth, and so forth; in a word, in the moral fall and the rapid advance of all
vices together with their accompanying ills, such as earlier times - they
think - have never seen. Others, by contrast, [find them] in unusual alterations in nature - in earthquakes, storms and floods, or comets and atmospheric signs.
In fact it is not without cause that human beings feel their existence a
burden, even if they themselves are the cause. The ground of this appears
to me to lie in this. - In the progress of the human race the culture of
talents, skill and taste (with their consequence, luxury) naturally runs
ahead of the development of morality; and this state is precisely the most
burdensome and dangerous for morality just as it is for physical wellbeing, because the needs grow stronger than the means to satisfY them.
But the moral disposition of humanity - which (like Horace's poene pede
claudo) 0 always limps behind, tripping itself up in its hasty course and often
stumbling - will (as, under a wise world governor, one may hope) one day
overtake it; and thus, even according to the experimental proofs of the
superior morals of our age as compared with all previous ones, one should
nourish the hope that the last day might sooner come on the scene with
Elijah's ascensions than with the like descent of Korah's troops into hell,6
and bring with it the end of all things on earth. Yet this heroic faith in
virtue does not seem, subjectively, to have such a generally powerful
influence for converting people's minds as a scene accompanied by terrors, which is thought of as preceding the last things.

Note. Here we have to do (or are playing) merely with ideas created by
reason itself, whose objects (if they have any) lie wholly beyond our field
of vision; although they are transcendent for speculative cognition, they
against tasting it, and so there was no other way to keep heaven from being polluted except to
take the advice of one of the angels who pointed out to them the distant earth, with the
words: "There is the toilet of the whole universe," and then carried them there in order to
relieve themselves, but then flew back to heaven leaving them behind. That is how the
human race is supposed to have arisen on earth.
, "Punishment with a lame foot"; the line actually reads: Raro antecedentem scelestuml Deseruit
pede Poena claudo ("Rarely does punishment fail to catch the guilty, though it runs with a lame
foot"), Horace, Odes 3.2.32.

225

8:332

IMMANUEL KANT

8:333

8:334

are not to be taken as empty, but with a practical intent they are made
available to us by lawgiving reason itself, yet not in order to brood over
their objects as to what they are in themselves and in their nature, but
rather how we have to think of them in behalf of moral principles directed
toward the final end of all things (through which, though otherwise they
would be entirely empty, acquire objective practical reality): hence we
have a free field before us, this product of our own reason, the universal
concept of an end of all things, to divide it up and to classifY what stands
under it according to the relation it has to our faculty of cognition.
Accordingly, the whole will be brought about, divided up and represented under three divisions: (I) the natural* end of all things according
to the order of divine wisdom's moral ends, which we therefore (with a
practical intent) can very well understand; (2) their mystical (supernatural)
end in the order of efficient causes, of which we understand nothing, and
(3) the contranatural (perverse) end of all things, which comes from us
when we misunderstand the final end; the first of these has already been
discussed, and what follows now is the remaining two.

In the Apocalypse (10:5-6): "An angel lifts his hand up to heaven and
swears by the one who lives from eternity to eternity who has created
heaven, etc.: that henceforth time shall be no more."7
If one does not assume that this angel "with his voice of seven thunders" (v. 3) wanted to cry nonsense, then he must have meant that henceforth there shall be no alteration; for if there were still alteration in the
world, then time would also exist, because alteration can take place only in
time and is not thinkable without presupposing it.
Now here is represented an end of all things as objects of sense - of
which we cannot form any concept at all, because we will inevitably
entangle ourselves in contradictions as soon as we try to take a single step
beyond the sensible world into the intelligible; that happens here since the
moment which constitutes the end of the first world is also supposed to be
the beginning of the other one, hence the former is brought into the same
temporal series with the latter, which contradicts itself.
But we also say that we think of a duration as infinite (as an eternity) not
because we have any determinate concept of its magnitude - for that is
impossible, since time is wholly lacking as a measure - but rather because
that concept - since where there is time, no end can come about - is
merely a negative one of eternal duration, by which we come not one step
* Natural (formaliter) means what follows necessarily according to laws of a certain order of
whatever sort, hence also the moral order (hence not always the physical order). Opposed to
it is the non natural, which can be either supernatural or contranatural. What is necessary
from natural causes is also represented as maternally natural (physically necessary).

226

THE END OF ALL THINGS

further in our cognition, but we will have said only that reason in its
(practical) intent toward its final end can never have done enough on the
path of constant alterations; and if reason attempts this with the principleP
of rest and immutability of the state of beings in the world, the result is
equally unsatisfactory in respect of its theoretical use; on the contrary, it
would fall into total thoughtlessness, and nothing would remain for it but
to think as the final end an alteration, proceeding to infinity (in time) in a
constant progression, in which the disposition (which is not a phenomenon,
like the former, but something supersensible, hence not alterable with
time) remains the same and is persisting. The rule for the practical use of
reason in accord with this idea thus says no more than that we must take
our maxims as if, in all alterations from good to better going into infinity,
our moral condition, regarding its disposition (the homo Noumenon,
"whose change takes place in heaven") were not subject to any temporal
change at all.
But that at some point a time will arrive in which all alteration (and with
it, time itself) ceases - this is a representation which outrages the imagination. For then the whole of nature will be rigid and as it were petrified: the
last thought, the last feeling in the thinking subject will then stop and
remain forever the same without any change. For a being which can
become conscious of its existence and the magnitude of this existence (as
duration) only in time, such a life - if it can even be called a life - appears
equivalent to annihilation, because in order to think itself into such a state
it still has to think something in general, but thinking contains a reflecting,
which can occur only in time. - Hence the inhabitants of the other world
will be represented, according to their different dwelling places (heaven
or hell), as striking up always the same song, their "Alleluia!," or else
eternally the same wailing tones ([Rev.] 19:1-6; 20:15): by which is indicated the total lack of all change in their state.
Likewise this idea, however far it surpasses our power to grasp it, is
very closely related to reason in its practical reference. Even assuming a
person's moral-physical state here in life at its best - namely as a constant
progression and approach to the highest good (marked out for him as a
goal) -, he still (even with a consciousness of the unalterability of his
disposition) cannot combine it with the prospect of satisfaaion in an eternally enduring alteration of his state (the moral as well as the physical).
For the state in which he now is will always remain an ill compared with a
better one which he always stands ready to enter; and the representation
of an infinite progression toward the final end is nevertheless at the same
time a prospectq on an infinite series of ills which, even though they may
be outweighed by a greater good, do not allow for the possibility of
P Princip
q

Prospea

227

8:335

IMMANUEL KANT

8:336

contentment; for he can think that only by supposing that the final end will
at sometime be attained.
Now the person who broods on this will fall into mysticism (for reason,
because it is not easily satisfied with its immanent, i.e. practical use, but
gladly ventures into the transcendent, also has its mysteries), where reason does not understand either itself or what it wants, but prefers to
indulge in enthusiasm rather than - as seems fitting for an intellectual
inhabitant of a sensible world - to limit itself within the bounds of the
latter. From this comes the monstrous system of Lao-kiun8 concerning the
highest good, that it consists in nothing, i.e. in the consciousness of feeling
oneself swallowed up in the abyss of the Godhead by flowing together
with it, and hence by the annihilation of one's personality; in order to have
a presentiment of this state Chinese philosophers, sitting in dark rooms
with their eyes closed, exert themselves to think and sense their own
nothingness. Hence the pantheism (of the Tibetans and other oriental
peoples); and in consequence from its philosophical sublimation Spinozism is begotten, which is closely akin to the very ancient system of emanation of human souls from the Godhead (and their final reabsorption into
it). All this because people would like at last to have an eternal tranquillity
in which to rejoice, constituting for them a supposedly blessed end of all
things; but reallyr this is a concept in which the understanding is simultaneously exhausted and all thinking itself has an end.

The end of all things which go through the hands of human beings, even
when their purposes are good, is folly, i.e. the use of means to their ends
which are directly opposed to these ends. Wisdom, that is, practical reason
using means commensurate to the final end of all things - the highest
good - in full accord with the corresponding rules of measure, dwells in
God alone; and the only thing which could perhaps be called human
wisdom is acting in a way which is not visibly contrary to the idea of that
[divine] wisdom. But this assurance against folly, which the human being
may hope to attain only through attempts and frequent alteration of his
plans, is rather a "gem which the best person can only follow after, even
though he may never apprehend it";' but he may never let the selfindulgent persuasion befall him - still less may he proceed according to
it - that he has grasped it. - Hence too the projects - altering from age to
age and often absurd - of finding suitable means to make religion in a
whole people pure and at the same time poweiful, so that one can well cry out:
Poor mortals, with you nothing is constant except inconstancy!9
, eigentlich
'cf. Philippians 3:12: "Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect, but
I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which I also am apprehended ofChrist]esus."

228

THE END OF ALL THINGS

If, meanwhile, these attempts have for once finally prospered far
enough that the community is susceptible and inclined to give a hearing
not merely to the received pious doctrines but also to a practical reason
which has been illuminated by them (which is also absolutely necessary
for a religion); if the sages (of a human sort) among the people - not
through an undertaking among themselves (as a clergy) but as fellow
citizens - draw up projects and for the most part agree - which proves in
a way that is above suspicion that they are dealing with the truth - and if
the people at large also takes an interest in it (even if not in every detail)
through a need, generally felt and not based on authority, directed to the
necessary cultivation of its moral disposition: then nothing seems to be
more advisable than to let those sages go ahead and pursue their course,
since for once, as regards the idea they are following, they are on a good
path; but as regards the success of the means they have chosen to the best
final end, since this - as it may turn out in the course of nature - always
remains uncertain, it is advisable always to leave it to providence. For
however incredulous one may be, one must - where it is absolutely impossible to foresee with certainty the success of certain means taken according to all human wisdom (which, if they are to deserve their name, must
proceed solely toward morality) - believe in a practical way in a concurrence of divine wisdom with the course of nature, unless one would rather
just give up one's final end. - Of course it will be objected: It has often
been said that the present plan is the best, one must stay with it from now
on, that is the state of things for eternity. "Whoever (according to this
concept) is good, he is good for always, and whoever (opposed to him) is
evil, is evil for ever" (Rev. 22:1 I): just as if eternity, and with it the end of
all things, might now have already made its entrance; - and likewise since
then new plans, among which the newest are often only the restoration of
an old one, have always been trotted out; and henceforth too there will be
no lack of more ultimate projects.
I am so very conscious of my incapacity to make a new and fortunate
attempt here that I, who obviously possess no great power of invention,
would rather advise that we leave matters as they last stood, and as for
nearly a generation they have proven themselves tolerably good in their
consequences. But since this may not be the opinion of men who are
either of great or else of enterprising spirit, let me modestly note not so
much what they would have to do as what they will have to take care that
they will be up against, because otherwise they would act against their own
intention (even if that were of the best).
Christianity has, besides the greatest respect that the holiness of its
laws irresistibly instills, something about it which is worthy of love. (Here I
mean not the worthiness of love of the person who obtained it for us with
great sacrifices, but that of the cause itself: namely, the moral constitution
which he founded, for the former [worthiness] may be inferred only from
229

8:337

IMMANUEL KANT

8:338

8:339

the latter.) Respect is without doubt what is primary, because without it no
true love can occur, even though one can harbor great respect for a person
without love. But if it is a matter not merely of the representation of duty
but also of following duty, if one asks about the subjeaive ground of actions
from which, if one may presuppose it, the first thing we may expect is what
a person will do - and not a matter merely of the objective ground of what
he ought to do - then love, as a free assumption of the will of another into
one's maxims, is an indispensable complement to the imperfection of
human nature (of having to be necessitated to that which reason prescribes through the law). For what one does not do with liking' he does in
such a niggardly fashion - also probably with sophistical evasions from the
command of duty - that the latter as an incentive, without the contribution of the former, is not very much to be counted on.
Now if to Christianity - in order to make good on it - one adds any sort
of authority (even a divine one), even if one's intention in doing so is wellmeaning and the end is actually just as good, then its worthiness to be loved
has nevertheless disappeared: for it is a contradiction to command not only
that someone should do something but that he should do it with liking.
Christianity has the intention of furthering love out of concern for the
observance of duty in general; and it produces it too, because its founder
speaks not in the quality of a commander demanding obedience to his will,
but in that of a friend of humanity who appeals to the hearts of his fellow
human beings on behalf of their own well-understood will, i.e. of the way
they would of themselves voluntarily act if they examined themselves
properly.
Thus it is from the liberal way of thinking - equally distant from a
slavish cast of mind and from licentiousness - that Christianity expects
the effia of its doctrine, through which it may win over the hearts of
human beings when their understanding has already been illuminated by
the representation of their duty's law. The feeling of freedom in the
choice of the final end is what makes the legislation worthy of its love. Thus although the teacher of this end also announces punishments, that is
not to be understood - or at least it is not suited to the proper nature" of
Christianity so to explain it - as though these should become the incentives for performing what follows from its commands; for to that extent it
would cease to be worthy of love. Rather, one may interpret this only as a
loving warning, arising out of the beneficence of the lawgiver, of preventing the harm that would have to arise inevitably from the transgression of
the law (for: lex est res surda et inexorabilis. Livy.);V because it is not
t gem
" eigentumliche Beschaffenheit
, "The law is deaf and inexorable"; the whole passage reads: Leges rem surdam, inexorabilem
esse, salubriorem, melioremque inopi quam potenti ("The laws are deaf things, inexorable, more
salutary and better to the powerless than to the powerful"); Livy, History ofRome 2.3+

230

THE END OF ALL THINGS

Christianity as a freely assumed maxim of life but the law which threatens
here; and the law, as an unchanging order lying in the nature of things, is
not to be left up to even the creator's arbitrary wiUW to decide its consequences thus or otherwise.
If Christianity promises rewards (e.g. "Be joyful and consoled, for everything will be repaid you in heaven"),lo this must not be interpretedaccording to the liberal way of thinking - as if it were an offer, through
which the human being would be hired, as it were, to a good course oflife;
for then Christianity would, once again, not be in itself' worthy of love.
Only the expectation Y of such actions arising from unselfish motives can
inspire respect in the person toward the one who has the expectation; but
without respect there is no true love. Thus one must not take that promise
in this sense, as if the rewards are to be taken for the incentives of the
actions. Love, through which a liberal way of thinking is bound to the
benefactor, is not directed toward the good received by the needy person,
but instead merely to the benefactor's generosity of will which is inclined
to confer it, even if he does not have the resources or is prevented from
carrying it out by other motives which come from a regard for what is
universally best for the world.
That is the moral worthiness to be loved which Christianity carries
with it, which still glimmers through the many external constraints which
may be added to it by the frequent change of opinions; and it is this which
has preserved it in the face of the disinclination it would otherwise have
encountered, and (what is remarkable) this shows itself in all the brighter
light in an age of the greatest enlightenment that was ever yet among
human beings.
If Christianity should ever come to the point where it ceased to be
worthy of love (which could very well transpire if instead of its gentle spirit
it were armed with commanding authority), then, because there is no
neutrality in moral things (still less a coalition between opposed principles a disinclination and resistance to it would become the ruling mode
of thought among people; and the Antichrist, who is taken to be the
forerunner of the last day, would begin his - albeit short - regime (presumably based on fear and self-interest); but then, because Christianity,
though supposedly destined to be the world religion, would not be fovored
by fate to become it, the (perverted) end of all things, in a moral respect,
would arrive.
Z

),

W Willkiir
"for sich
Y Ansinnen
, Principien

231

 id="file23242764" filename="lgbt-migrants-in-south-africa-religion-can-be-a-blessing-and-a-curse" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.mambaonline.com/2021/12/21/lgbt-migrants-in-south-africa-religion-can-be-a-blessing-and-a-curse/">
 LGBT migrants in South Africa: religion can be a blessing, and a curse 
 John Marnell has documented the diverse faith-based experiences of LGBT migrants in South Africa 
 Moral panics over sexual and gender rights are often shaped by religious beliefs. In many countries, political, cultural and faith leaders use religious rhetoric to justify exclusionary practices and constrict the space available to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) activists. 
 The politicisation of religion in Africa is now well documented. It is a strategy used to maintain the idea that heterosexuality is the only natural and normal expression of human desire. 
 In my new book, Seeking Sanctuary: Stories of Sexuality, Faith and Migration, I explore both dynamics. 
 The book records a multi-year oral history project with the LGBT Ministry at Holy Trinity Catholic Church in Johannesburg. Since 2009, the ministry has opened its doors to LGBT people of all faiths and nationalities, and it remains popular with migrants, refugees and asylum seekers. As well as providing spiritual nourishment, the ministry offers a safe space in which LGBT people can receive support, build community and advocate for their rights. 
 In documenting the lives of the ministry’s members, I hoped to understand how their faith has evolved over time and how religion has shaped their experiences of displacement. I also spoke with church leaders about the role religious institutions can play in combating homophobia, transphobia and xenophobia. 
 LGBT displacement and South Africa 
 South Africa has long hosted LGBT people fleeing persecution. Many are seeking protection from violence, prosecution and harsh criminal penalties. Others come from countries where homophobic and transphobic attitudes remain pervasive, even when there are no specific laws targeting sexual and gender minorities. 
 Those who reach South Africa hope its progressive laws will shield them from the experiences left behind – beatings, extortion, familial abuse, forced marriage or simply having to hide their identities, desires and relationships. 
 As the stories in my book show, religion is a major reason why LGBT Africans leave their countries of origin. It also contributes to the discrimination they encounter in transit and in South Africa. 
 Religious objections to sexual and gender diversity can even undermine a person’s ability to claim asylum. Recently, a Zambian man was denied protection because he identifies as both gay and Christian – something the Refugee Status Determination Officer deemed impossible. 
 Yet, religion can also be a source of comfort and strength, offering LGBT migrants, refugees and asylum seekers a theological foundation from which to claim their identities and rights. 
 Religion as a driver of displacement 
 Thirty people were interviewed for this project. They came from a wide array of countries – Cameroon, Ethiopia, Lesotho, Nigeria, South Africa, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe – and identified with a variety of faith traditions, yet all reported feelings of shame and guilt in their formative years. 
 This inner turmoil was attributed to their religious upbringing and the negative comments to which they were exposed. Some shared memories of religious leaders expressly denouncing LGBT people, while others recalled a general culture of homophobia and transphobia legitimised on religious grounds. 
 In extreme cases, participants were subjected to direct violence from religious leaders: 
 The teachers [at the madrasa] would punish me for being feminine. At first they would just use words to make me feel bad, but over time they began to beat me. They would say that Islam doesn’t tolerate boys like me. – Eeyban (Ethiopia, gay man, p. 87). 
 Religious leaders’ sanctioning of homophobia and transphobia can have profound impacts. It can make LGBT people believe they are sinful and diseased, and can encourage discrimination from families, communities and governments. In many cases, it establishes a culture of impunity for perpetrators of violence. 
 Religion as a source of comfort 
 Despite recounting many traumatic experiences, the participants seldom framed religion in wholly negative terms. 
 Many shared positive memories of attending religious services and described their faith as integral to their sense of self. Very few saw a contradiction between their spiritual beliefs and their sexual orientation or gender identity. Instead, they offered up theological arguments for diversity: 
 The Bible tells us that love is the most important thing, that we can’t know God if we don’t know love, so for me it is important to honour the desires that God has blessed me with. – Nkady (Lesotho, lesbian woman, p. 206) 
 The Biblical commandment to love without judgement was also used to critique religious leaders’ inaction: 
 Faith leaders must take responsibility for promoting diversity. … They must preach love, not hate. – Mr D (Cameroon, bisexual man, p. 72) 
 This shift from perceiving religion as an oppressive force to one that can promote inclusion was attributed to participants’ involvement with the LGBT Ministry. Meeting progressive faith leaders helped them make peace with their identities and find strength in their beliefs. 
 Moving beyond familiar scripts 
 In much of the literature on LGBT displacement, religion is presented negatively. It is seen as little more than a reason why LGBT people move. My book argues for a more nuanced reading of faith, sexuality, gender and migration. The stories show that LGBT Africans are interpreting scripture in ways that reflect their aspirations, values, needs and experiences, while also buttressing their demands for justice and equality. 
 It is crucial that researchers, activists, state officials and faith leaders expand their understanding of the relationship between religion and displacement. This will help them think differently about the experiences of LGBT migrants, refugees and asylum seekers. It also serves as a reminder of the positive contribution that religious institutions can make in the fight against prejudice. 
 John Marnell is a Doctoral Researcher at the African Centre for Migration & Society (ACMS), at the University of the Witwatersrand. This article is republished from The Conversation under a Creative Commons license. Read the original article. 

 id="file23242785" filename="lgbt-migrants-in-south-africa-religion-can-be-a-blessing-and-a-curse-169758" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://theconversation.com/lgbt-migrants-in-south-africa-religion-can-be-a-blessing-and-a-curse-169758">
 LGBT migrants in South Africa: religion can be a blessing, and a curse 
 Author 
 Doctoral Researcher at the African Centre for Migration & Society (ACMS), University of the Witwatersrand 
 Disclosure statement 
 John Marnell received funding from The Other Foundation to undertake this project. 
 Partners 
 Moral panics over sexual and gender rights are often shaped by religious beliefs. In many countries, political, cultural and faith leaders use religious rhetoric to justify exclusionary practices and constrict the space available to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) activists. 
 The politicisation of religion in Africa is now well documented. It is a strategy used to maintain the idea that heterosexuality is the only natural and normal expression of human desire. 
 In my new book, Seeking Sanctuary: Stories of Sexuality, Faith and Migration, I explore both dynamics. 
 The book records a multi-year oral history project with the LGBT Ministry at Holy Trinity Catholic Church in Johannesburg. Since 2009, the ministry has opened its doors to LGBT people of all faiths and nationalities, and it remains popular with migrants, refugees and asylum seekers. As well as providing spiritual nourishment, the ministry offers a safe space in which LGBT people can receive support, build community and advocate for their rights. 
 In documenting the lives of the ministry’s members, I hoped to understand how their faith has evolved over time and how religion has shaped their experiences of displacement. I also spoke with church leaders about the role religious institutions can play in combating homophobia, transphobia and xenophobia. 
 LGBT displacement and South Africa 
 South Africa has long hosted LGBT people fleeing persecution. Many are seeking protection from violence, prosecution and harsh criminal penalties. Others come from countries where homophobic and transphobic attitudes remain pervasive, even when there are no specific laws targeting sexual and gender minorities. 
 Those who reach South Africa hope its progressive laws will shield them from the experiences left behind – beatings, extortion, familial abuse, forced marriage or simply having to hide their identities, desires and relationships. 
 As the stories in my book show, religion is a major reason why LGBT Africans leave their countries of origin. It also contributes to the discrimination they encounter in transit and in South Africa. 
 Religious objections to sexual and gender diversity can even undermine a person’s ability to claim asylum. Recently, a Zambian man was denied protection because he identifies as both gay and Christian – something the Refugee Status Determination Officer deemed impossible. 
 Yet, religion can also be a source of comfort and strength, offering LGBT migrants, refugees and asylum seekers a theological foundation from which to claim their identities and rights. 
 Religion as a driver of displacement 
 Thirty people were interviewed for this project. They came from a wide array of countries – Cameroon, Ethiopia, Lesotho, Nigeria, South Africa, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe – and identified with a variety of faith traditions, yet all reported feelings of shame and guilt in their formative years. 
 This inner turmoil was attributed to their religious upbringing and the negative comments to which they were exposed. Some shared memories of religious leaders expressly denouncing LGBT people, while others recalled a general culture of homophobia and transphobia legitimised on religious grounds. 
 In extreme cases, participants were subjected to direct violence from religious leaders: 
 The teachers [at the madrasa] would punish me for being feminine. At first they would just use words to make me feel bad, but over time they began to beat me. They would say that Islam doesn’t tolerate boys like me. – Eeyban (Ethiopia, gay man, p. 87). 
 Religious leaders’ sanctioning of homophobia and transphobia can have profound impacts. It can make LGBT people believe they are sinful and diseased, and can encourage discrimination from families, communities and governments. In many cases, it establishes a culture of impunity for perpetrators of violence. 
 Religion as a source of comfort 
 Despite recounting many traumatic experiences, the participants seldom framed religion in wholly negative terms. 
 Many shared positive memories of attending religious services and described their faith as integral to their sense of self. Very few saw a contradiction between their spiritual beliefs and their sexual orientation or gender identity. Instead, they offered up theological arguments for diversity: 
 The Bible tells us that love is the most important thing, that we can’t know God if we don’t know love, so for me it is important to honour the desires that God has blessed me with. – Nkady (Lesotho, lesbian woman, p. 206) 
 The Biblical commandment to love without judgement was also used to critique religious leaders’ inaction: 
 Faith leaders must take responsibility for promoting diversity. … They must preach love, not hate. – Mr D (Cameroon, bisexual man, p. 72) 
 This shift from perceiving religion as an oppressive force to one that can promote inclusion was attributed to participants’ involvement with the LGBT Ministry. Meeting progressive faith leaders helped them make peace with their identities and find strength in their beliefs. 
 Moving beyond familiar scripts 
 In much of the literature on LGBT displacement, religion is presented negatively. It is seen as little more than a reason why LGBT people move. My book argues for a more nuanced reading of faith, sexuality, gender and migration. The stories show that LGBT Africans are interpreting scripture in ways that reflect their aspirations, values, needs and experiences, while also buttressing their demands for justice and equality. 
 It is crucial that researchers, activists, state officials and faith leaders expand their understanding of the relationship between religion and displacement. This will help them think differently about the experiences of LGBT migrants, refugees and asylum seekers. It also serves as a reminder of the positive contribution that religious institutions can make in the fight against prejudice. 

 id="file23242603" filename="List_of_Jewish_prayers_and_blessings" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Jewish_prayers_and_blessings">
 Listed below are some Hebrew prayers and blessings that are part of Judaism that are recited by many Jews. Most prayers and blessings can be found in the Siddur, or prayer book. This article addresses Jewish liturgical blessings, which generally begin with the formula: 
 In the transliterations below, ' is used to refer to the sh'vah, which is similar/equivalent to ə; a mid-word aleph, a glottal stop; and a mid-word ayin, a voiced pharyngeal fricative ʕ similar/equivalent to Arabic ع. Whenever ` is used, it refers to ayin whether word-initial, medial, or final. 'H/h' are used to represent both he, an English h sound as in "hat"; and ḥes, a voiceless pharyngeal fricative ħ equivalent to Arabic ح. Whenever 'ḥ' is used, it refers to ḥet. Resh is represented by an 'r,' though it's equivalent to Spanish 'r,' Spanish 'rr,' or French 'r,' depending on one's dialect. In all other regards, transliterations are according to the Sephardi tradition, with modern Hebrew pronunciation. 
 Modeh Ani is a short prayer recited first thing after waking in the morning. 
 Elohai Neshamah 
 אלהי נשמה‎ 
 Thanking God for restoring the soul in the morning. Said following washing the hands and Asher Yatzar blessings. 
 Blessings over the Torah 
 ברכות התורה‎ 
 Thanking God for giving us the Torah and a blessing on the Torah that will be learned over the course of the day. Followed by some short passages from Torah and the Mishnah. 
 Morning blessings 
 ברכות השחר‎ 
 Blessings thanking God for most of the basic functions of our lives (sight, clothes, movement etc.) 
 Seder Korbanot 
 סדר הקרבנות‎ 
 Recounting the order of the day in the Temple service. Includes the description of the daily sacrifice from the Book of Numbers and chapter 5 of Zevachim that contains a list of all the types of sacrifices that were given. 
 13 midot of Rabi Yishmael 
 ברייתא דרבי ישמעאל‎ 
 A passage of learning from the Oral Law. It is a list of the 13 principles that Rabi Yishmael would use to interpret the Torah. 
 The Shema prayers is said every day in Shacharit and Maariv. There are always two blessings before the Shema, but after the Shema in the day there is only one blessing, and at night there are two (or three in some communities outside of Israel). 
 A centerpiece of Jewish prayer services which affirms belief and trust in the One God, the Shema is composed of three sections taken from the Torah. 
 The third blessing recited following the Shema during Maariv. This blessing is only said by some communities outside of Israel. It is not said at all in Israel, and is not said by anyone on Shabbat or Yom Tov 
 The "standing [prayer]", also known as the Shemoneh Esreh ("The Eighteen"), consisting of 19 strophes on weekdays and seven on Sabbath days and 9 on Rosh haShana Mussaf. It is the essential component of Jewish services, and is the only service that the Talmud calls prayer. It is said three times a day (four times on Sabbaths and holidays, and five times on Yom Kippur). The source for the Amida is either as a parallel to the sacrifices in the Temple, or in honor of the Jewish forefathers. 
 The prayer is divided into 3 sections, blessings of praise for God, requests for our needs (or exalting the holiness of the day for Shabbat and Yom Tov) and finally blessings of thanksgiving. 
 First blessing of the Amidah, and describes God's choosing of the Jewish patriarchs, and God's protection of them. Many non-Orthodox communities include the matriarchs in this blessing. 
 Gevurot 
 גבורות‎ 
 Second blessing of the Amidah, describing God's might and God's mastery over the natural world. 
 Kedushat Hashem 
 קדושת ה'‎ 
 Third blessing of the Amidah, affirming the holiness of God. During the repetition of the Amida the Kedushah is added. 
 On a regular weekday there are 13 blessings that ask God for our needs. A small number of rabbis, such as David Bar-Hayim based on fragments from the Cairo Geniza say only 12 blessings here. On fast days in the times of the Talmud there were a number of additional blessings, and in communities today a 14th blessing is added to the Chazzan's repetition on fast days. 
 דעת‎ 
 Asking for wisdom and understanding. 
 Teshuva 
 סליחה‎ 
 Asking for God's forgiveness. 
 Geula 
 Asking for God to rescue the Jewish people from our travails. On fast days during the repetition of the Amida, Aneinu is said here. 
 רפואה‎ 
 Asking for good health. 
 Birkat Hashanim 
 Asking for a blessing for the produce of the earth. We also ask for the rain needed to sustain life. Broadly also asking for income. During times of drought a special prayer for rain is added here. 
 Kibutz Galuyot 
 קבוץ גלויות‎ 
 Asking God to bring the Jews back from the Exile into Israel. 
 Mishpat 
 משפט‎ 
 Asking God to judge us justly and to restore the judges to Israel. 
 Minim 
 מינים‎ 
 Asking to destroy the heretical sects and informers. This blessing was a later addition to the Amida, and is the 19 blessing. 
 צדיקים‎ 
 Asking God to help and support righteous people. 
 Boneh Yerushalayim 
 Asking to have Jerusalem rebuilt and returned to its former glory. On Tisha B'av the Nachem prayer is added here. 
 Malchut bet David 
 מלכות בית דוד‎ 
 Asking for the monarchy to be reinstated and for David's descendants to become the kings. In the Palestinian tradition, this blessing was merged with the previous one to maintain 18 blessings. 
 Shome'a tefilla 
 שומע תפליה‎ 
 Asking God to answer our prayers. Any additional requests can be added in this blessing. On fast days Aneinu is added here in the silent prayer. 
 On Shabbat and Yom Tov there is only a single blessing. 
 Kedushat hayom 
 קדושת היום‎ 
 Describing the holiness of the particular day. In Mussaf it also describes the sacrifice that was brought in the Temple on that day. 
 During Mussaf of Rosh HaShana there are 3 blessings in the middle, each built around 10 verses from the Tanach around a particular theme. 
 Malchuyot 
 מלכויות‎ 
 Describing how God was made king of the world on this day. 
 Zichronot 
 Thanking God for the Temple service and for accepting our prayers. 
 Modim 
 מודים‎ 
 General thanksgiving. As the Chazan says this prayer in the repetition, the congregation reads a paragraph of thanksgiving silently. 
 Shalom 
 שלום‎ 
 Thanking God for bringing peace into the world. When the Priestly Blessing is said it is added here. 
 Proclaiming the holiness of God. said during the repetition of the Amida 
 Modim drabanan 
 מודים דרבמן‎ 
 Additional thanks to God, said while the Chazan is saying Modim during the repetition of the Amida. 
 The "Priestly Blessing," recited by the Kohanim every day in Israel during the blessing for peace. Outside of Israel some traditions say this every Shabbat and Yom Tov, while others say it only on Yom Tov. 
 Supplicatory prayer said during Shacharit and Mincha. Not said on Shabbat, Yom Tov and other festive days. 
 Psalms 113–118, recited as a prayer of praise and thanksgiving on Jewish holidays. Hallel is said in one of two forms: Full Hallel and Partial Hallel. 
 Daily psalm. Each day has a different chapter to be said. There are also special chapters to be said on some special days. 
 A lyrical prayer recited at the end of services, praising God's uniqueness. Some traditions say it only on Shabbat and festivals, while others say it every day 
 The Aleinu praises God for allowing the Jewish people to serve him, and expresses their hope that the whole world will recognize God and abandon idolatry. 
 An Aramaic prayer which focuses on the idea of magnification and sanctification of God's name. There are five versions of kaddish for different purposes. 
 Half kaddish 
 חצי קדיש‎ 
 A short version of kaddish to mark the end of a section of prayers. 
 Full kaddish 
 קדיש שלם‎ 
 A longer version of kaddish to mark the end one of the major prayers, and is said after the amida. 
 Kaddish yatom 
 קדיש יתום‎ 
 A version said by mourners in the 11 months following the death of a parent. 
 More formally known as "The Song of Glory," this song is sung at the end of morning prayers on Shabbat. It is also recited following Maariv on Yom Kippur. 
 A prayer recited in the synagogue at the beginning of the evening service on Yom Kippur (יום כיפור‎), the Day of Atonement. It is a declaration of absolution from vows taken, to free the congregants from guilt due to unfulfilled vows during the previous (and coming) year. 
 A series of psalms that are said before Maariv on Shabbat to welcome the Shabbat queen. 
 Prayer said on Succot while circling the bimah. There is an extended version said on Hoshana Raba 
 These blessings are also relevant to the festivals with some minor changes to the wording. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to light the Shabbat candle[s]. 
 Blessed are You, Lord our God, King of the Universe, Who sanctified us with His commandments, and hoped for us, and with love and intent invested us with His sacred Sabbath, as a memorial to the deed of Creation. It is the first among the holy festivals, commemorating the exodus from Egypt. For You chose us, and sanctified us, out of all nations, and with love and intent You invested us with Your Holy Sabbath. Blessed are You, Adonai, Sanctifier of the Sabbath. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who distinguishes between the sacred and the secular, between light and dark, between Israel and the nations, between the seventh day and the six days of labor. Blessed are You, LORD, Who distinguishes between the sacred and the secular. 
 When any of these blessings are done for the first time that year, the blessing of she'he'cheyanu is said. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to hear the sound of the shofar. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to sit in the succa. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to eat matzah. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to eat maror. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to take up the lulav. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to read the megilla. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to kindle the Hanukkah light[s]. 
 Remembering the miracle of the day (said following the appropriate blessing above) 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who performed miracles for our ancestors in those days at this time... 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments, and commanded us regarding the commandment of fringes. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and has commanded us to wrap ourselves with fringes. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and has commanded us to put on tefillin. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and has commanded us regarding the commandment of tefillin. Blessed is the Name of His glorious kingdom for ever and ever. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to affix the mezuzah. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us concerning immersion. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us concerning the immersion of vessels. 
 The hands are ritually washed before partaking of certain staples of life. 
 In the Ashkenazic tradition and some Sephardic and other communities, it is done before eating bread. In some Sephardic rites and in the German community originating in Frankfurt it is done before drinking wine and or eating bread, alone or with the wine (such as would be done before a Sabbath or festive meal) at which time this blessing is said: 
 After washing but before drying the hands, the following blessing below is said. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us concerning the taking (drying) of hands. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who brings forth bread from the earth. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who creates varieties of nourishment. 
 HaGafen 
 Wine made from grapes, or grape juice. Not said for any other drink or any other grape-based product. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who creates the fruit of the vine. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who creates the fruit of the tree. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who creates the fruit of the ground. 
 SheHaKol 
 Any foods or drinks not in the first five categories. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, through Whose word everything comes into being. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who creates fragrant grasses. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who gives pleasant smells to fruit. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who creates pleasing perfumes. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Whose power and strength fill the world. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who remembers the covenant and who is trustworthy in his covenants and fulfills His word. 
 Seeing the ocean or large body of water for the first time in 30 days 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who made the large bodies of water. 
 Seeing trees blossom for the first time in the spring 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who left out nothing in His world and created pleasant creations and good trees so that people can derive benefit from them. 
 Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, who has granted us life, sustained us, and enabled us to reach this occasion. 
 For positive new experiences, including the first time a mitzvah is being done, new clothes or a new annual fruit. 
 Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, the just judge. 
 For bad news and negative experiences. Also said at a funeral by the mourners prior to tearing the clothes. 
 Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the Universe, Who bestows good things upon the unworthy, and has bestowed upon me every goodness. 
 For surviving life-threatening situations, such as illness or childbirth. 

 id="file23242538" filename="litEpiphanyChalkBlessing.pdf" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://d2y1pz2y630308.cloudfront.net/13543/documents/2016/6/litEpiphanyChalkBlessing.pdf">
EPIPHANY BLESSING OF CHALK:
A Resource
EPIPHANY BLESSING OF CHALK
The chalk to be blessed may be placed in a
basket for the faithful to take home with them
after Mass. The blessing prayers may be
included on a card with the chalk or
reproduced in the bulletin.
The blessing of the chalk takes place just
before the final blessing and dismissal. The
following prayer may be used:

It has been a tradition in the Catholic Church to
bless chalk at the Masses for Epiphany, and
then use the blessed chalk as part of blessing
one’s home in the New Year.
The home blessing can be done as follows:
Use the blessed chalk to write:
20+C+M+B+XX

May God,
who provided a safe dwelling place
for the eternal Word,
bless this chalk,
the homes of the faithful,
and the people who live there,
through Christ our Lord.

above the doorways: 20XX for the year; C, M,
B for the 3 Magi – Casper, Melchior, and
Balthasar – and for Christus Mansionem
Benedicat, Latin for “May Christ Bless this
House. 
As you are writing, pray one of the following
prayers:

The prayer card or bulletin insert could include
the following information and prayers Æ Æ

Note: Because the blessing of the chalk takes
place before the final blessing, it would be best
to proclaim the Date of Easter after the homily
in order to avoid “overloading  the concluding
rites.

May all who come to our home this year
rejoice to find Christ living among us; and may
we seek and serve, in everyone we meet, that
same Jesus who is Lord, forever and ever.
Amen.
Lord God of heaven and earth, you revealed
your only-begotten Son to every nation by the
guidance of a star.
Bless this house and all who inhabit it.
Fill us with the light of Christ, that our concern
for others may reflect your love.
We ask this through Christ our Lord.
Amen.
Lord our God, bless this household.
May we be blessed with health, goodness of
heart, gentleness, and the keeping of your law.
We give thanks to you, Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, now and for ever.
Amen.

 id="file23242673" filename="Liturgical_Theology_after_Schmemann.html_id_gZWUDwAAQBAJ" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://books.google.com/books/about/Liturgical_Theology_after_Schmemann.html?id=gZWUDwAAQBAJ">
 Liturgical Theology after Schmemann: An Orthodox Reading of Paul Ricoeur 
 While only rarely reflecting explicitly on liturgy, French philosopher Paul Ricoeur (1913-2005) gave sustained attention to several themes pertinent to the interpretation of worship, including metaphor, narrative, subjectivity, and memory. Inspired by his well-known aphorism, “The symbol gives rise to thought,  Liturgical Theology after Schmemann offers an original exploration of the symbolic world of the Byzantine Rite , culminating in a Ricoeurian analysis of its Theophany “Great Blessing of Water.  . 
 The book examines two fundamental questions: 1) what are the implications of the philosopher’s oeuvre for liturgical theology at large? And 2)how does the adoption of a Ricoeurian hermeneutic shape the study of a particular rite? Taking the seminal legacy of Orthodox theologian Alexander Schmemann (1921-1983) as its point of departure, Butcher contributes to the renewal of contemporary Eastern Christian thought and ritual practice by engaging a spectrum of current theological and philosophical conversations. 
 O autorovi (2018) 
 Brian A. Butcher (Author) Brian A. Butcher is Assistant Professor in the Metropolitan Andrey Sheptytsky Institute of Eastern Christian Studies at the University of St. Michael’s College, in the University of Toronto. He also teaches at U of T’s Trinity College, as well as at Augustine College (Ottawa). He is a contributor to the Oxford Handbook of Sacramental Theology and a subdeacon in the Ukrainian Greco-Catholic Church. 
 Andrew Louth, FBA (Foreword By) Andrew Louth, FBA, an Orthodox priest, is Professor Emeritus of Patristic and Byzantine Studies at Durham University, UK, and Visiting Professor of Eastern Orthodox Theology at the Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam. He is the author of several books on patristics and theology. 

 id="file23242734" filename="liturgical_theology_and_law_regarding-exposition_and_benediction_of_the_blessed_sacrament.pdf" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.archgh.org/media/1544/liturgical_theology_and_law_regarding-exposition_and_benediction_of_the_blessed_sacrament.pdf">
Liturgical Theology and Law Concerning Reservation,
Adoration and Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament
A Document of the Office of Worship, Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston
The guiding document for Exposition and Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament is entitled
Holy Communion and Worship of the Eucharist Outside Mass1 (HCWEOM). What
follows are some basic principles that flow from this document or other guidelines.

Background and Theology
Definition of Terms
Adoration: The acknowledgment of God as God, Creator and Savior, the Lord and
Master of everything that exists. Through worship and prayer, the Church and individual
persons give to God the adoration which is the first act of the virtue of religion. The first
commandment of the law obliges us to adore God. Adoration is the first act of the virtue
of religion. To adore God is to acknowledge him as God, as the Creator and Savior, the
Lord and Master of everything that exists, as infinite and merciful Love. "You shall
worship the Lord your God, and him only shall you serve," says Jesus, citing
Deuteronomy.2
Exposition: The liturgical rite of Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament in which the
Blessed Sacrament is exposed in a monstrance or a ciborium and either placed upon
an altar or carried in procession. Adoration occurs during exposition.
Benediction: A concluding blessing rite for the rite of Exposition and Benediction of the
Blessed Sacrament which includes an appropriate hymn, incensation of the Blessed
Sacrament, a closing prayer and Eucharistic Blessing.
Eucharist: The Eucharist is “the source and summit of the Christian life  (LG 11). “The
other sacraments, and indeed all ecclesiastical ministries and works of the apostolate,
are bound up with the Eucharist and are oriented toward it. For in the blessed Eucharist
is contained the whole spiritual good of the Church, namely Christ himself, our Pasch 
(PO 5). "The Eucharist is the efficacious sign and sublime cause of that communion in
the divine life and that unity of the People of God by which the Church is kept in being. It
is the culmination both of God’s action sanctifying the world in Christ and of the worship
men offer to Christ and through him to the Father in the Holy Spirit. (Eucharisticum
mysterium, 6) Finally, by the Eucharistic celebration we already unite ourselves with the
heavenly liturgy and anticipate eternal life, when God will be all in all (1 Cor 15:28). In
brief, the Eucharist is the sum and summary of our faith: “Our way of thinking is attuned

1
2

Sacred Congregation for Divine Worship, Holy Communion and Worship of the Eucharist Outside Mass, 1973.
Catechism of the Catholic Church, 2096. See also, 2628 and 1083.

-1-

to the Eucharist, and the Eucharist in turn confirms our way of thinking. (St. Irenaeus,
Adv. haeres. 4, 18, 5).3

Eucharist: Food for the Journey
During Jesus’ earthly ministry, his words and deeds were compelling. They challenged
and encouraged, comforted and convicted, revealed and mystified. Those who came to
know him as the Son of God, stayed with him and at the end of his earthly ministry he
broke bread with them and celebrated a meal which he redefined so that they would
remember what he had taught them:
While they were eating, Jesus took bread, said the blessing,
broke it, and giving it to his disciples said, "Take and eat; this
is my body." Then he took a cup, gave thanks, and gave it to
them, saying, "Drink from it, all of you, for this is my blood of
the covenant, which will be shed on behalf of many for the
forgiveness of sins." (Mt 26:26-28; cf. Mk 14:22-24, Lk
22:17-20, 1 Cor 11:23-25)
We also know that on that first day of the week after his Passion, those who had
followed him closest were confused, dejected, sad and lost until they recognized him in
the breaking of the bread which gave them strength and peace.
The disciples who encountered the Risen Lord on the road to Emmaus sum up our
encounter with the Lord. Pope John Paul II summarized it this way:
Mane nobiscum, Domine! Stay with us, Lord! (cf. Lk 24:29)
With these words, the disciples on the road to Emmaus
invited the mysterious Wayfarer to stay with them, as the sun
was setting on that first day of the week when the incredible
had occurred. According to his promise, Christ had risen; but
they did not yet know this. Nevertheless, the words spoken
by the Wayfarer along the road made their hearts burn within
them. So they said to him: "Stay with us". Seated around
the supper table, they recognized him in the "breaking of
bread" - and suddenly he vanished. There remained in front
of them the broken bread; there echoed in their hearts the
gentle sound of his words.4
As Christ speaks to us and as we walk with him as disciples, our hearts burn with love.
Our relationship leads us to take time to sit with him and remember what he has done
and taught. We want to reflect and meditate on all that He is and all he offers. We want
to contemplate the face of God revealed in Christ through the Holy Spirit. Christ
promises to be with us until the end of time.5
3

Catechism of the Catholic Church, 1324-1327
John Paul II, Urbi et Orbi Message, Easter Sunday, 27 March 2005.
5
See Mtt 28:20.
4

-2-

Real Presence
Christ’s presence allows us to encounter him time and again. In the Constitution on the
Sacred Liturgy from the Second Vatican Council, the Church teaches:
“Christ is always present in his Church, especially in its
liturgical celebrations. He is present in the sacrifice of the
Mass, not only in the person of his minister, ‘the same now
offering, through the ministry of priests, who formerly offered
himself on the cross,’ but especially under the eucharistic
elements. By his power he is present in the sacraments, so
that when a man baptizes it is really Christ himself who
baptizes. He is present in his word, since it is he himself who
speaks when the holy Scriptures are read in the Church. He
is present, lastly, when the Church prays and sings, for he
promised: ‘Where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them’ (Mt 18:20). 6
Of the many ways in which Christ is present in the Church, the Eucharist is cherished as
the means par excellence.

Purpose of the Liturgy and the Eucharist
The Church teaches, in the Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, that the goal of all the
Church’s activity is that all people be one in their praise of God and come together “to
take part in the sacrifice, and to eat the Lord’s Supper. 7 It is the Eucharist, which is our
food for our journey to the Lord. It is the Eucharist which strengthens us to remain
faithful and which shapes us ever more completely to be members of Christ’s body. It is
the Eucharist, which is the source of every good work undertaken. “The Eucharist
contains the Church’s entire spiritual wealth, that is Christ himself. He is our Passover
and living bread; through his flesh, made living and life-giving by the Holy Spirit, he is
bringing life to people and in this way inviting and leading them to offer themselves
together with him, as well as their labors and all created things. 8
The purpose of the Eucharist is first and foremost to provide spiritual nourishment to the
faithful. Jesus said: "I am the living bread that came down from heaven; whoever eats
this bread will live forever; and the bread that I will give is my flesh for the life of the
world. . . . For my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink" (Jn 6:51-55). The whole
Christ is truly present, body, blood, soul, and divinity, under the appearances of bread
and wine—the glorified Christ who rose from the dead after dying for our sins. This is
what the Church means when she speaks of the "Real Presence" of Christ in the
Eucharist. This presence of Christ in the Eucharist is called "real" not to exclude other
types of his presence as if they could not be understood as real (cf. Catechism, no.
1374). The risen Christ is present to his Church in many ways, but most especially
6

Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, 7.
Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, 10.
8
Holy Communion and Worship of the Eucharist Outside Mass [hereafter HCWEOM], no. 1.
7

-3-

through the sacrament of his Body and Blood.9 Borrowing from the doctrine of
transubstantiation, Christ’s presence in the Eucharist is a substantial presence.

Eucharistic Reservation
After the consecration of the Eucharist, the bread and wine are no longer bread and
wine but instead the body, blood, humanity and divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ. Christ
remains present until the consecrated elements cease to exist. In other words, until the
Eucharistic species under the appearance of bread or wine is consumed and digested
so that the form of bread or wine no longer exists.
While it is possible for the Eucharistic elements to be consumed during the communion
rite of the Mass, some portion of the Eucharist under the form of bread is usually
reserved to be taken to the sick and the dying who could not be present with the
community for the Eucharistic Liturgy. This is the purpose of the reserved Sacrament.
Because Christ is truly present in the Eucharistic elements, we adore Christ in the
Blessed Sacrament. This is a secondary gift given to the Church. The practice of
adoring Christ in this heavenly food developed very early in the Church’s tradition.

Place of Reservation (Including Temporarily)
The Eucharist must be reserved in the cathedral church or its equivalent, in every parish
church and in the church or oratory attached to the house of a religious institute or
society of apostolic life.
The Eucharist may be reserved in a chapel of a bishop and, with the permission of the
local ordinary, in other churches, oratories or chapels.10
The Eucharist should be regularly reserved in only one tabernacle for a church or
oratory. The location of the tabernacle is to be prominent, conspicuous, beautifully
decorated and suitable for prayer. The tabernacle is to be solid, immovable, opaque
and locked.11 A special lamp, fueled by way of oil, is to burn at the tabernacle to
indicate and honor the presence of Christ.12
The place of reservation should be a space that is dedicated to Christ present in the
Eucharist and that is designed so that the attention of one praying there is drawn to the
tabernacle that houses the presence of the Lord. Iconography can be chosen from the
rich treasury of symbolism that is associated with the Eucharist.13 Suitability of its
location is made by reason of the quietness of the location, the space available in front
of the tabernacle, and also the supply of benches or seats and kneelers.14
9

USCCB, The Real Presence of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist: Basic Questions and Answers, no. 1,
2001.
10
Canon 934.
11
Canon 938, HCWEOM 10.
12
Canon 940, GIRM 316, HCWEOM 11.
13
Built of Living Stones 73
14
Redemptionis Sacramentum 130 (hereafter RS)

-4-

The Eucharist may not be reserved outside of a parish church, approved chapel or
oratory. It is never permitted to reserve the Blessed Sacrament in one’s home, office or
other place.

Transporting the Blessed Sacrament
It is not licit to keep the Eucharist on one’s person or to carry the Eucharist on a journey
unless there is an urgent pastoral need.15 The Blessed Sacrament is to be transported
reverently in a pyx. Only a priest, deacon, instituted acolyte or extraordinary minister of
Holy Communion should transport the Blessed Sacrament when bringing communion to
the sick or on occasion when communion is taken to a group that is unable to celebrate
the Eucharist on a Sunday.
When communion has been distributed, the remaining hosts should be returned to the
tabernacle immediately or consumed. It is entirely inappropriate that ministers would
conduct ordinary business, e.g., stopping for a meal or shopping, when transporting the
Blessed Sacrament.
The pyx is to be purified by lightly rinsing the vessel and consuming the water. After the
remaining elements have been consumed, the vessel should be washed with mild
detergent.

Relationship Between the Mass and Adoration
“The worship of the Eucharist outside of the Mass is of inestimable value for the life of
the Church. This worship is strictly linked to the celebration of the Eucharistic Sacrifice.
The presence of Christ under the sacred species reserved after Mass – a presence
which lasts as long as the species of bread and of wine remain – derives from the
celebration of the sacrifice and is directed towards communion, both sacramental and
spiritual. It is the responsibility of Pastors to encourage, also by their personal witness,
the practice of Eucharistic adoration, and exposition of the Blessed Sacrament in
particular, as well as prayer of adoration before Christ present under the Eucharistic
species. 
“It is pleasant to spend time with him, to lie close to his breast like the Beloved Disciple
(cf. Jn 13:25) and to feel the infinite love present in his heart. If in our time Christians
must be distinguished above all by the ‘art of prayer’, how can we not feel a renewed
need to spend time in spiritual converse, in silent adoration, in heartfelt love before
Christ present in the Most Holy Sacrament? How often, dear brother and sisters, have I
experienced this, and drawn from it strength, consolation and support! 
“This practice, repeatedly praised and recommended by the Magisterium, is supported
by the example of many saints. Particularly outstanding in this regard was Saint
Alphonsus Liguori, who wrote: ‘Of all devotions, that of adoring Jesus in the Blessed
Sacrament is the greatest after the sacraments, the one dearest to God and the one
15

Canon 935.

-5-

most helpful to us’. The Eucharist is a priceless treasure: by not only celebrating it but
also by praying before it outside of Mass we are enabled to make contact with the very
wellspring of grace. A Christian community desirous of contemplating the face of Christ
in the spirit which I proposed in the Apostolic Letters Novo Millennio Ineunte and
Rosarium Virginis Mariae cannot fail also to develop this aspect of Eucharistic worship,
which prolongs and increases the fruits of our communion in the body and blood of the
Lord.’16
“Worship of the Blessed Sacrament is, as it were, the spiritual ‘context’ in which the
community can celebrate the Eucharist well and in truth. Only if it is preceded,
accompanied and followed by this inner attitude of faith and adoration can the liturgical
action express its full meaning and value. The encounter with Jesus in Holy Mass is
truly and fully brought about when the community can recognize that in the Sacrament
he dwells in his house, waits for us, invites us to his table, then, after the assembly is
dismissed, stays with us, with his discreet and silent presence, and accompanies us
with his intercession, continuing to gather our spiritual sacrifices and offer them to the
Father 17
Therefore both public and private devotion to the Most Holy Eucharist even outside
Mass should be vigorously promoted, for by means of it the faithful give adoration to
Christ, truly and really present.18
“When the faithful adore Christ present in the sacrament, they should remember that
this presence derives from the Sacrifice [of the Mass] and has as its purpose both
sacramental and spiritual communion. 19
In order to assist the faithful to maintain this proper relationship, it is very appropriate
that the celebration of the Mass immediately precede the period of exposition and
adoration.20

Distinction between Adoration and Exposition
Eucharistic Adoration is silent private prayer before the Blessed Sacrament housed
within in the tabernacle.21 This practice is strongly encouraged in every parish and may
be observed over an extended period of time.
Eucharistic Exposition is the public liturgical ritual whereby the Blessed Sacrament is
exposed in the monstrance or ciborium for the veneration of the faithful. By its nature
as a liturgical ritual, Eucharistic Exposition consists of the liturgical rites of Exposition,
Adoration, Benediction, and Reposition of the Blessed Sacrament. The period of
Adoration includes song, prayers, and readings to mark the time and to help direct the
16

Pope John Paul II, Encyclical Letter, Ecclesia de Eucharistia, no. 25: AAS 95 (2003) pp. 449-450
Pope Benedict XVI, Homily, Solemnity of the Body and Blood of Christ, Rome 2012.
18
RS, 134
19
HCWEOM, 80.
20
HCWEOM, 94.
21
USCCB, Thirty-One Questions on Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament, #8.
17

-6-

attention of the faithful. Suitable periods of silence are also required.22 A homily or
reflection is also appropriate.
The rite requires a number of people to be present before this liturgy is appropriately
celebrated.23 Exposition is not permitted when only one person is present.24 When
sufficient numbers are not present, the Blessed Sacrament is reposed. Reposition of
the Blessed Sacrament may not occur more than twice in a day.25 The exposed
Blessed Sacrament must never be left unattended, even briefly.26 It is also never
permitted to simply cover the Blessed Sacrament with a veil when unattended or to lock
the Blessed Sacrament in a closet or room.
Shorter periods of Exposition may be scheduled. However, the period of Adoration
must be suitably long enough for readings, songs and prayers prior to the Eucharistic
Blessing. Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament solely for the purpose of giving the
benediction is prohibited.27
Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament may be held in churches, or oratories which are
permitted to reserve the Blessed Sacrament, observing the norms of the liturgical
books. A period of Exposition may not be held in the same part of the church or oratory
when Mass is being celebrated.28 It is recommended that where the Blessed
Sacrament is reserved, that Exposition be held at least once a year, provided that a
suitable gathering of the faithful is expected and the norms of the liturgical books are
observed.29
If Exposition is planned for a day or several days, it should be interrupted during the
celebration of the Mass unless Mass is celebrated in a chapel separate from the area of
Exposition and at least some of the faithful remain in adoration.30
Perpetual Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament in a parish requires the explicit written
permission of the archbishop.

Signs of Reverence
“Genuflection in the presence of the blessed sacrament, whether reserved in the
tabernacle or exposed for public adoration, is on one knee. 
“For exposition of the Blessed Sacrament in the monstrance, four to six candles are
lighted, as at Mass, and incense is used. 
22

HCWEOM 95.
HCWEOM 86, Eucharisticum mysterium, 63, Canon 942
24
Ibid. Practically, if only a single worshiper is present who becomes ill or must respond to an emergency, the
proper security of the Blessed Sacrament cannot be assured.
25
HCWEOM, 88.
26
RS, 138.
27
HCWEOM 89.
28
Canon 941
29
Canon 942.
30
HCWEOM 83.
23

-7-

For exposition of the Blessed Sacrament in the ciborium, as least two candles should be
lighted and incense may be used. 31
It is inappropriate for the faithful to hold private conversations, talk on the phone, or read
a book (other than spiritual reading). During the period of adoration.

Minister of Exposition
The ordinary minister of exposition is a priest or a deacon. In the absence of a priest or
deacon, an instituted acolyte or other extraordinary minister of Holy Communion may
expose the Blessed Sacrament and then later repose.
To expose the Blessed Sacrament, an extraordinary minister may open the tabernacle,
place the ciborium on the altar or the Host in the monstrance. At the end of the period
of adoration, the minister may then replace the Blessed Sacrament in the tabernacle.
An extraordinary minister does not give the blessing with the Blessed Sacrament as a
priest or deacon may.32

Vesture
A priest or a deacon vests in an alb or a surplice over a cassock, and a stole. An
extraordinary minister may wear an alb or a coat and tie for men or a professional
pantsuit or dress for women as instructed by the archbishop in the Archdiocesan
Guidelines pertaining to extraordinary ministers of Holy Communion.
When exposing the Blessed Sacrament and when giving the blessing, a priest or
deacon should wear a white cope and humeral veil to give the final blessing at the end
of adoration.33

Rite of Exposition and Benediction
Liturgy of the Hours
During extended periods of Exposition, the Liturgy of the Hours may be celebrated
before the Blessed Sacrament.34

Rosary
The Rosary may be prayed before the Blessed Sacrament. The Rosary, though clearly
Marian in character, is at heart a Christ centered prayer. In the sobriety of its elements,
it has all the depth of the Gospel message in its entirety, of which it can be said to be a
compendium. It is an echo of the prayer of Mary, her perennial Magnificat for the work
of the redemptive Incarnation which began in her virginal womb. With the Rosary, the
31

HCWEOM, 84-85.
HCWEOM, 91.
33
HCWEOM, 92.
34
HCWEOM, 96.
32

-8-

Christian people sit at the school of Mary and is led to contemplate the beauty on the
face of Christ and to experience the depths of his love. Through the Rosary the faithful
receive abundant grace, as though from the very hands of the Mother of the
Redeemer.35
In addition to announcing the mystery, reading an appropriate portion of Scripture helps
to guide the meditation on the mystery. Time for silent reflection is also important.36

Preparation
The appropriate place for the celebration of Exposition and Adoration of the Blessed
Sacrament is in a Church or Chapel with the Blessed Sacrament exposed upon the
altar.
 The top of the altar is to be covered with a white cloth;
 4 to 6 candles for exposition in a monstrance or 2 to 4 candles for exposition in a
ciborium;
 Thurible, charcoal, incense, matches
 Cope and humeral veil


Overview of the Rite
There are many prepared outlines of the rite which may be celebrated in the parish.
Some
are
given
on
the
Office
of
Worship
web
page
www.archgh.org/worship/Eucharistic_Exposition.
The Liturgical Press has prepared a ritual text entitled Order for the Solemn Exposition
of the Holy Eucharist. Contact the Office of Worship for more information or to
purchase a copy.
It is preferred that the host used in Exposition be consecrated in a Mass immediately
before the period of exposition.
During the Mass, at the end of Communion, the priest leaves the Blessed Sacrament on
the altar either in a ciborium or in the monstrance. The Mass ends with the Prayer after
Communion. The Concluding Rites are omitted. The priest may incense the Blessed
Sacrament before departing.
If Exposition does not begin with the celebration of the Mass what follows outlines the
rite:
Hymn
After all have assembled, a priest or deacon, wearing cope and humeral veil,
brings the Blessed Sacrament to the Altar in a monstrance, a song may be sung.
He may be accompanied by altar servers with candles.

35
36

John Paul II, Rosarium Virginis Mariae, no. 1.
John Paul II, Rosarium Virginis Mariae, no. 30.

-9-

The Blessed Sacrament is placed on the altar. The priest or deacon then kneels
before the altar and incenses the Blessed Sacrament. The opening song is
concluded and a period of silent prayer follows.

Opening Prayer
The priest or deacon then goes to the chair, where he prays the opening prayer.

Liturgy of the Word
One or more readings from Sacred Scripture follow. A suitable pause for silent
reflection follows each reading. A spiritual song or a psalm may be sung in
response to the Word.37

Homily\Reflection
The priest or deacon may then give a homily following the last reading.
reading from the Church Fathers or the Saints would also be appropriate.

A

Intercessions (or Litany of the Holy Eucharist)
The faithful intercede for the needs of the world and the local community.

Lord’s Prayer
Benediction
Reposition and Hymn

37

See HCWEOM, nos. 113-188. Readings from the Votive Mass of the Holy Eucharist and the Votive Mass of the
Sacred Heart are appropriate.

- 10 -

 id="file23242688" filename="lm_i_will_bless_you_and_you_will_be_a_blessing-marriage_liturgy.pdf" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.episcopalchurch.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2021/01/lm_i_will_bless_you_and_you_will_be_a_blessing-marriage_liturgy.pdf">
Liturgical Resources 1

“I Will Bless You, and
You Will Be a Blessing 

Revised and Expanded Edition

As authorized by the 78th General Convention, 2015

Page 1 of 158

Certificate
I certify that this edition of the “Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant  conforms to the version
approved for use by the 78th General Convention of The Episcopal Church in 2015.
I further certify that this edition of “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Marriage  and “The Celebration and
Blessing of a Marriage 2,  from “Liturgical Resources I: I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing, Revised
and Expanded 2015   conforms to the version approved for trial use by the 78th General Convention of The
Episcopal Church in 2015.
Juan Oliver
Custodian of the Standard Book of Common Prayer
Advent 2015

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

2 of 158

Table of Contents
I. Introduction to the Revised and Expanded Edition
II. Introduction to the First Edition (2012)
III. Faith, Hope, and Love: Theological Resources
for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships
Preface
Overview: Theological Reflection on Same-Sex Relationships
1. The Church’s Call: A Focus on Mission
2. The Church’s Joy: A Theology of Blessing
3. The Church’s Life: Covenantal Relationship
4. The Church’s Challenge: Christian Unity and Biblical Interpretation
Responses to “Faith, Hope, and Love 
a. Thomas E. Breidenthal
b. John E. Goldingay
c. Deirdre Good
d. Dora Rudo Mbuwayesango
e. George R. Sumner
f. Fredrica Harris Thompsett
IV. Hearing, Seeing, and Declaring New Things:
Pastoral Resources for Preparing Couples for a Liturgy of Blessing or Marriage
Overview: Pastoral Care for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
1. Available Resources: Materials for Pastoral Preparation
2. Particular Issues Affecting Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
3. Presenters
4. Outline of Pre-Blessing/Marriage Preparation for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
Handouts
1. Theological Reflection on Covenantal Relationship: Spiritual Practice for
Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
2. Declaration of Intention for Marriage
3. Declaration of Intention for Lifelong Covenant
4. About Presenters—For the Couple
5. Information for Presenters
6. Model Congregational Guidelines
V. Liturgical Resources for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships
1. The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant (revised)
2. The Witnessing and Blessing of a Marriage
3. The Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage (2)
a. The Blessing of a Civil Marriage
b. An Order for Marriage

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

3 of 158

VI. Discussion Guide to “I Will Bless You, and You Will Be a Blessing  (revised and expanded edition)
Introduction to the Discussion Guide
1. Study Area One: History
2. Study Area Two: Theology and the Bible
3. Study Area Three: Liturgy
4. Study Area Four: Civil and Canon Law
5. Study Area Five: Mission
Handouts
A. Covenant for Discussion
B. Understanding the History
C. An Introduction to General Convention
D. Relationships and Blessing: Reflection Questions
E. Theological Reflection on Same-Sex Relationships: A Summary of “Faith, Hope, and Love 
F. Principles for Evaluating Liturgical Materials
VII. Appendices
1. A History of the Marriage Canon
2. Marriage Canons
3. A Review of General Convention Legislation
4. Consultation on Same-Sex Marriage: Executive Summary of Evaluations
5. Glossary of Legal and Canonical Terms

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

4 of 158

I. Introduction to the Revised and Expanded Edition
In 2012, the General Convention of The Episcopal Church commended “Liturgical Resources 1: I Will Bless
You, and You Will Be a Blessing  for study and use throughout The Episcopal Church. In the 2013-2015
triennium, the materials were widely used in a number of dioceses, and the Standing Commission on Liturgy
and Music (SCLM) invited responses through several avenues. This new volume is the result of this process.

Responses to Liturgical Resources 1
In January 2013, the SCLM asked bishops of The Episcopal Church to report whether they had authorized the
liturgy “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant,  and if so, whether they had authorized any
modifications to meet the needs of members of The Episcopal Church. The SCLM received responses from
half (fifty-five) of the dioceses, and of these, thirty-eight had authorized use of the resource. In many
dioceses in jurisdictions where civil marriage is legal for same-sex couples, the bishop authorized revisions of
the liturgy to allow clergy to officiate at a civil marriage of a same-sex couple.
In fall 2013, nearly one thousand people accessed an online survey distributed with the assistance of
diocesan contact people and through social media. Responses were overwhelmingly positive to all sections
of Liturgical Resources 1. However, a number of respondents expressed frustration or confusion that the
liturgy appeared to be a “separate but equal  rite, which therefore was not equivalent to marriage.
The Commission heard similar comments at an international, ecumenical, indaba-style conversation on samesex marriage that it hosted at Grace and Holy Trinity Cathedral, Kansas City, Missouri, June 3–5 2014. The
SCLM invited participation from every diocese of The Episcopal Church and every province of the Anglican
Communion where civil marriage is legal for same-sex couples, and from ecumenical partner churches in the
United States. Participants at the consultation included fifty-seven people representing twenty-four dioceses
of The Episcopal Church, six other churches of the Anglican Communion, and five ecumenical partners, along
with the President of the House of Deputies, the Presiding Bishop, and the Secretary of General Convention.
Two dioceses of The Episcopal Church and two provinces of the Anglican Communion declined to send
representatives. While none of the participants in the consultation was opposed to same-sex marriage, the
conversation enabled the Commission to understand more deeply the issues facing clergy and same-sex
couples in contexts where civil marriage is legal.
To evaluate the Kansas City consultation, the SCLM asked the Reverend Doctor Paula Nesbitt, a sociologist
who has worked extensively in evaluation of the continuing indaba process in the Anglican Communion, to
interview a selected cross-section of participants. We have included her executive summary of her report as
an appendix to this volume.

Faith, Hope, and Love: Theological Resources
In Resolution A049, the 2012 General Convention directed the SCLM to develop the theological resource
“with specific attention to further engagement with scripture and the relevant categories and sources of
systematic theology (e.g., creation, sin, grace, salvation, redemption, human nature).  The Commission
invited responses from theologians representing different disciplines (Scripture, ethics, Church history,
systematic theology, missiology) and diverse theological perspectives. These essays are included in this
revised and expanded edition; they represent the viewpoint of the individual authors rather than the
consensus of the SCLM.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

5 of 158

The Church’s Canon Law and Laws of the States
Liturgical Resources 1 included a study of the complexities of civil and canon law regarding marriage and civil
unions. It offered a number of scenarios, taking into account differences in both civil law and diocesan
policy.
Since 2012, dramatic changes in civil law in the United States have reshaped the context. When Liturgical
Resources 1 was first published as part of the 2012 Blue Book Report to the 77th General Convention, seven
states and the District of Columbia allowed same-sex civil marriage. On June 26, 2015, the Supreme Court of
the United States ruled, “The Court, in this decision, holds same-sex couples may exercise the fundamental
right to marry in all States. It follows that the Court must also hold – and it now does hold – that there is no
lawful basis for a State to refuse to recognize a lawful same-sex marriage performed in another State on the
ground of its same-sex character. 1
Recognizing that resolutions to amend the marriage canon were likely to come before the 2015 General
Convention, the SCLM determined that the original section on canon law might no longer be relevant or
provide useful guidance. Instead, an appendix to this revised and expanded edition of Liturgical Resources 1
provides a history of the marriage canon prepared by the Task Force on the Study of Marriage for its 2015
Blue Book report. In addition, the definitions of “civil union,  “Defense of Marriage Act,  and “same-sex
marriage  have been revised in the Glossary.
In Resolution A036, the 2015 General Convention revised Canon I.18, and in Resolution A054, the Convention
affirmed that the provisions of Canon I.19.3, regarding marriage after divorce, apply to the liturgies in this
resource. We have included both the revised Canon I.18 and Canon I.19, which was not revised, in Appendix
2.

Hearing, Seeing, and Declaring New Things: Pastoral Resources
Several participants in the June 2014 consultation on same-sex marriage expressed concern that the pastoral
resource portrayed gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender people in a negative and stereotypical manner.
The SCLM formed an ad hoc task group to recommend revisions. The first half of the resource has been
revised accordingly.
The five-session process for preparing couples for a blessing of their covenantal relationship was not
revised. Though the SCLM received some suggestions for a different order of the sessions and for other
changes, no clear consensus emerged. The content and structure of the sessions is recommended but not
required, and the SCLM believes that clergy and lay people trained for preparing couples can adapt the
resource to suit their particular approach.
After the 2015 General Convention, the pastoral resource was revised to take account of the revisions of the
marriage canon (Canon I.18) and the authorization of trial use of the liturgies for marriage as well as the U.S.
Supreme Court decision permitting same-sex marriage throughout the United States.

Liturgical Resources
In response to comments by those who used the 2012 rite, the SCLM made some revisions to the original
liturgical resource, “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant.  The 2015 General Convention
authorized this revised liturgy for use “under the direction and with the permission of the bishop exercising
ecclesiastical authority  (Resolution 2015-A054).
In addition, heeding the concern that “separate but equal  rites are inherently unequal, the SCLM developed
and recommended to the 2015 General Convention an adaptation of the 2012 liturgy that can be used for
marriage for any couple, as well as “The Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage 2,  a gender-neutral
1

Obergefell v. Hodges, 576 U.S. _____ (slip op., at 28).

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

6 of 158

adaptation of the marriage rite in the 1979 Book of Common Prayer. The Convention authorized these rites
for trial use, that is, as a proposed revision of the BCP. Resolution 2015-A054 directs that these liturgies be
used under the direction and with the permission of the diocesan bishop, and stipulates that bishops
exercising ecclesiastical authority or, where appropriate, ecclesiastical supervision will make provision for all
couples asking to be married in the Episcopal Church to have access to the liturgies.

Discussion Guide
Some respondents to the survey expressed appreciation for the materials in the discussion guide, while a
significant minority indicated that they had not used the materials because they had already done this work.
Given the rapidly changing context, the SCLM believes that the material will continue to be of use in some
places. Since the Commission did not receive any strong recommendations for revision of the discussion
guide, the primary change to this section of the resource is the addition of an option to present two of the
liturgies in this resource. In addition, after the 2015 General Convention minor revisions were made to take
account of the decisions of General Convention as well as the U.S. Supreme Court decision on the marriage
of same-sex couples.

Terminology
Since 2009, as the SCLM has gone about its work on these resources, terminology has been debated. Should
we refer to “same-gender  or “same-sex  couples? As indicated in the Introduction to the first edition, the
2012 General Convention directed that the resource use “same-sex  rather than “same-gender,  and the
SCLM then determined that “opposite-sex  rather than “different-gender  would be more in keeping with
the spirit of Resolution 2012–A049. The task group that reviewed the pastoral resource recommended that
the resource refer to LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender) people. The terms reflect growing
awareness of the complexity of sexual orientation and gender identity.
The Commission consulted with scholars working in the area of gender studies and learned that the term
“gender and sexual minorities  (GSM) is increasingly preferred as an all-encompassing term. We have
introduced that term in the section “Hearing, Seeing, and Declaring New Things: Pastoral Resources for
Preparing Couples for a Liturgy of Blessing or Marriage  and included a discussion of sexual orientation and
gender identity. In addition, recognizing the complexity of gender and sexuality, we have used the term
“different-sex  rather “opposite-sex  throughout this revised and expanded edition.

Conclusion
We offer this revised and expanded edition with gratitude for all who have offered their feedback, and in the
hope that these resources will continue to strengthen our shared witness to the gospel.
Ruth A. Meyers
on behalf of
The Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music and
The Special Legislative Committees on Marriage of the 78th General Convention
July 2015

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

7 of 158

II. Introduction to the First Edition (2012)
As members of the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music (SCLM) of the Episcopal Church, we give
thanks for the many and various ways that the grace of God in Christ is made manifest in our Church and
throughout the world. Whenever the Church pronounces God’s blessing, it does so with such gratitude
always in mind.
For more than thirty years, the Episcopal Church has been responding to the call to seek and serve Christ in
its members who are gay and lesbian. In 1976, a resolution of General Convention affirmed that “homosexual
persons are children of God who have a full and equal claim with all other persons upon the love,
acceptance, and pastoral concern and care of the Church. 1 Since then, we have been in a churchwide
discernment process about how we live out that resolution. Some congregations and their clergy have
welcomed same-sex couples and offered liturgical blessings of their relationships, and some dioceses have
developed guidelines for such blessings. Resolution C051 of the 2003 General Convention recognized “that
local faith communities are operating within the bounds of our common life as they explore and experience
liturgies celebrating and blessing same-sex unions.  Six years later, General Convention called for the
collection and development of resources for those blessings. The materials presented here respond to that
call.
Resolution C056 of the 2009 General Convention of the Episcopal Church directed the Standing Commission
on Liturgy and Music to “collect and develop theological and liturgical resources  for the blessing of samesex relationships. This resolution instructed the Commission to work in consultation with the House of
Bishops and to “devise an open process for the conduct of its work, inviting participation from provinces,
dioceses, congregations, and individuals who are engaged in such theological work, and inviting theological
reflection from throughout the Anglican Communion.  We have understood the process for our work to be
as important as the resources themselves.

The Scope of Our Work
Because Resolution 2009–C056 directed us to “collect and develop  resources, we have not debated
whether the Church should bless same-sex relationships. Nonetheless, we recognize that Episcopalians and
Christians throughout the Anglican Communion have disagreed about whether such blessings are a
legitimate development within Christian tradition or an unacceptable departure from biblical teaching.
Resolution 2009–C056 acknowledged this dispute in the resolve “that this Convention honor the theological
diversity of this Church in regard to matters of human sexuality,  and previous General Convention
resolutions have also recognized this disagreement. In the theological essay “Faith, Hope, and Love  we
acknowledge these differences, and offer an approach to blessing same-sex relationships that reflects the
centrality of Scripture in Anglican tradition, interpreted in concert with the historical traditions of the Church
and in the light of reason. The discussion guide included in these resources is intended to enable all
congregations and dioceses to explore the materials, whether or not they believe the Church should bless
same-sex relationships.
As we developed the resources, many people asked whether we were actually preparing a rite for same-sex
marriage. In accord with Resolution 2009–C056, the Commission has understood our charge to be the
development of a liturgy of blessing, not marriage. Nonetheless, there are a number of parallels to opposite1

The text of Resolution 1976–A069 and other General Convention legislation concerning same-sex relationships is included in an
appendix to these resources.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

8 of 158

sex marriage, as General Convention Resolution 2000–D039 suggested when it acknowledged that “there
are currently couples in the Body of Christ and in this Church who are living in marriage and couples in the
Body of Christ and in this Church who are living in other life-long committed relationships.  That 2000
resolution then set forth the expectation that “such relationships will be characterized by fidelity,
monogamy, mutual affection and respect, careful, honest communication, and the holy love which enables
those in such relationships to see in each other the image of God,  and denounced “promiscuity,
exploitation, and abusiveness in the relationships of any of our members.  These expectations have defined
the Commission’s understanding of the same-sex relationships for which we have developed resources.
While the liturgy we have developed is not called “marriage,  we recognize significant parallels: two people
publicly make a lifelong, monogamous commitment to one another with the exchange of solemn vows in a
ritual that pronounces God’s blessing on their life together.
The question of marriage is complicated by ongoing changes in American civil law. As of August 2011, six
states and the District of Columbia issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples, five states allow civil unions,
and seven recognize some form of domestic partnership; on the other hand, thirty states have adopted
constitutional language defining marriage as between one man and one woman and thirty-nine states have
statutes defining marriage in this way.2 Civil law in other countries where the Episcopal Church is located
adds further complexity. Both the Book of Common Prayer and the Canons of the Episcopal Church require
clergy to conform to the laws of the state regarding marriage and describe marriage as being between a
man and a woman. To address this complexity, these resources include an essay on canon law that discusses
scenarios likely to arise as same-sex couples request an authorized liturgy for blessing of their relationship
and/or civil marriage (or union) in the Church.
In addition to questions about the term “marriage,  we received many comments about the terms “gender 
and “sex.  Following the wording of Resolution 2009–C056, in the resource presented to the 2012 General
Convention, the Commission used the term “same-gender  to describe these relationships and “differentgender  as the comparable term. However, the 2012 General Convention directed that the term “same-sex 
be used rather than “same-gender,  and the published resource makes this change. In addition, as the
Commission reviewed the resource for publication, it determined that the use of term “opposite-sex  rather
than “different-gender  was in keeping with the spirit of the 2012 General Convention resolution, and so the
published resource makes this change as well. This is more than a linguistic question. As the Commission
worked on these resources, we acknowledged but did not address the complexity of contemporary social
and academic conversations about the categories of “sex  and “gender.  The pastoral resources for
preparation of couples prior to a liturgy of blessing offer ways to work with individuals who identify
themselves as bisexual or transgender. The resources expect that a bisexual or transgender couple who
seeks the Church’s blessing of their relationship will commit to monogamy and lifelong faithfulness, the
same commitment asked of every other same-sex and opposite-sex couple.

Collecting Resources
The Commission has gathered a vast amount of materials, including official studies, service leaflets from
liturgies of blessing, and diocesan and provincial guidelines for these blessings. The Archives of the Episcopal
Church established a digital archive for the project, http://www.episcopalarchives.org/SCLM/, where anyone
may review the materials we have gathered.
Resolution 2009–C056 allows bishops to “provide generous pastoral response  to meet the needs of the
Church’s members, so in December 2009, the chair of the Commission asked all diocesan bishops to report
what provisions they were making and what resources they were commending to their dioceses. Twentyseven bishops responded to this request, and a number of these bishops included theological, pastoral,
teaching, and/or liturgical resources. Seven other dioceses subsequently submitted materials. All diocesan
materials that we received are available for review in the digital archive for Resolution 2009–C056.
2

This information is from the website of the National Conference of State Legislatures, www.ncsl.org.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

9 of 158

We gathered liturgical resources from many places. Clayton Morris, who served as Liturgical Officer for the
Episcopal Church until 2009, had accumulated numerous materials over the course of nearly two decades.
The Commission received resources from lay and ordained Episcopalians throughout the Church, including
some of our own members. Commission members reviewed all of these as we began the process of
developing liturgies. A representative sampling of the resources is posted on the digital archive, and all of
the resources will be permanently housed at the Archives of the Episcopal Church.

Developing Resources
At our March 2010 meeting, the Commission began our work in response to this resolution with a day of
theological reflection. That conversation resulted in a brief outline of the resources to be developed:
•

one or more essays setting forth scriptural and theological foundations for blessing same-sex
relationships;

•

one or more rites for blessing same-sex relationships;

•

pastoral and teaching resources to assist clergy and congregations as they consider these
blessings; and

•

resources designed to help communities understand and address canonical and legal matters.

This proposed outline became the basis for four task groups formed to develop materials. These groups
were advisory to the Commission, which made the final decision about the resources to be reported to the
77th General Convention in 2012.
In forming the task groups, the Commission sought the wisdom and experience of lay people and clergy
from both academic and congregational contexts. Members of the task groups reflected the diversity of the
Episcopal Church in terms of age, gender, race/ethnicity, geography, and sexual orientation. The task groups
met four times in 2010 and 2011, and the chairs of the task groups met monthly by telephone or video
conference. The Commission discussed the work at each of its five meetings during the triennium.

An Open Process … Inviting Participation
Consultation with the House of Bishops
In September 2010, the chair of the Commission and four of the task-group chairs presented to the House of
Bishops a draft of theological and liturgical principles that would guide this work. Responses from the
bishops helped refine those principles. At the March and September 2011 House of Bishops meetings,
bishops serving on the Commission and/or the task groups updated their colleagues. At the September 2011
meeting, bishops had an informal opportunity to discuss the final draft of the theological essay and the
liturgy with the bishops who are members of the Commission.

Province I Hearing
In October 2010, the Commission meeting in New Hampshire included a hearing with bishops, other clergy,
and same-sex couples from each of the seven dioceses in Province I, which comprises the six New England
states. The evolving legal status of civil unions and marriage equality in those states has meant that many of
the dioceses have been addressing questions of blessing same-sex relationships for many years. Province I is
the only province of the Episcopal Church to develop a resource for clergy ministering to same-sex couples,
and a majority of the dioceses in this province have guidelines for blessing these relationships. Thus, our
meeting in one of the dioceses of Province I offered a good opportunity to consult with those engaged in
this work, as directed in Resolution 2009–C056.
At the hearing, thirty-three people, lay and ordained, testified about their experiences. Many told the
Commission that congregations were transformed when they joined in the celebration of a blessing. For
some congregations and couples, the blessing of a civil union as part of the regular Sunday liturgy was an
LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

10 of 158

especially powerful expression of the Church’s acceptance and care for the couple. Clergy and couples alike
were surprised at how jubilant congregations were. We also heard about the cost of secrecy in places where
relationships had to be hidden and blessings could not be openly celebrated. Couples and clergy spoke of
the joy that came when relationships could be openly acknowledged. A few couples told powerful stories of
reconciliation that happened within their families when their relationship was celebrated and blessed in a
Church liturgy.

Churchwide Survey Regarding Pastoral and Teaching Materials
In October 2010, the Task Group on Pastoral and Teaching Resources created a Web-based survey asking
what resources congregations were using to prepare same-sex couples who came to the Church seeking a
blessing, and what teaching materials and resources were used or would be needed to help congregations in
a discernment process about welcoming the blessing of same-sex relationships. The Commission used both
official and unofficial channels to invite responses to the survey: a press release sent to diocesan
communicators, a letter to all members of the 2009 House of Deputies and the House of Bishops, invitations
on the unofficial list-serve for bishops and deputies, and networking by members of the Commission and the
task groups.
Between October 2010 and January 6, 2011, we received 1,131 responses to the survey from 111 dioceses and
all nine provinces of the Episcopal Church. Twenty-three percent of the respondents stated that the blessing
of same-sex relationships already occurs in their congregations, and of these, 55 percent confirmed that
their congregations had engaged in an educational and/or discernment process before the blessing of samesex relationships began. With regard to preparing same-sex couples, 32 percent of respondents said that
their preparation differed from that provided for opposite-sex couples, and 43 percent expressed a need for
additional resources. The data from this survey helped guide the development of the pastoral and teaching
resources.

Churchwide Consultation
The Commission invited every diocese in the Episcopal Church to send two General Convention deputies, one
lay and one clergy, to an overnight consultation at the conclusion of its March 2011 meeting in Atlanta,
Georgia. Three goals were set forth:
•

to inform the deputies about the work of the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music in
response to Resolution 2009–C056;

•

to engage the deputies in theological reflection in response to the Commission’s work, and to
solicit feedback that would inform the Commission and its task groups as they continued their
work;

•

to equip the deputies to report to the rest of their deputations and engage them in ongoing
theological reflection about the blessing of same-sex relationships.

Materials distributed to participants at the consultation are available for review in the SCLM digital archive,
which also includes a link to the webcast of the entire consultation.
One hundred ninety-five deputies from ninety-eight dioceses registered for the gathering. Most responded
enthusiastically to the process. A significant majority stated on the evaluation form that they felt either
“completely equipped  or “somewhat equipped  to discuss this work in their dioceses and at the 2012
General Convention. When asked what they valued most, one responded, “the thoughtful and prayerful way
that people with differing opinions were able to discuss this important work.  Another deputy noted “the
opportunity to speak and listen to other people and the broader perspective I gained from those
interactions; the opportunity to engage the process, principles and issues that are in play as we do this work
together; the real and abiding sense that we are doing this work ‘together.’  A few deputies commented on
the absence of opposing viewpoints in the plenary sessions. One wrote, “The only thing lacking for me was

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

11 of 158

an opportunity for those who are new to engaging this conversation or who are opposed to have enough
space to express their reservations, be heard, and maybe to hear constructive, respectful responses. 

Review of Draft Resources
After the task groups presented a complete first draft of the resources to the Commission in June 2011, we
made the drafts available to a group of consultant reviewers. During July 2011, 133 people, lay and ordained,
representing all nine provinces of the Episcopal Church, offered thousands of comments on the draft
resources. In August, the task groups’ extensive revisions led to final drafts for the Commission.

Inviting Reflection from throughout the Anglican Communion
In addition to the direction of Resolution 2009–C056, the Commission was mindful that the 2004 Windsor
Report urged “all provinces that are engaged in processes of discernment regarding the blessing of same sex
unions to engage the Communion in continuing study of biblical and theological rationale for and against
such unions  (par. 145).
Knowing that the Anglican Church of Canada has been addressing this subject for many years, we requested
and received liturgies from several of the Canadian dioceses. The digital archive includes, under “ChurchWide Resources,  an issue of Liturgy Canada that gives an overview of the history and summarizes the
guidelines and rites available on diocesan websites in the Anglican Church of Canada.

International Anglican Liturgical Consultation (IALC)
The IALC, a biennial gathering, includes liturgical scholars, representatives nominated and sent by provinces
of the Anglican Communion, and members of liturgical commissions of Anglican provinces. Since provinces
may refer matters to the Consultation, the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music requested time on the
agenda of the August 2011 meeting. The IALC Steering Committee not only granted a half-day for this
discussion, but also met in March 2011 with representatives of the Commission to learn more about the work
and to prepare for the discussion in the full Consultation.
The IALC meeting included fifty-five people from nineteen provinces of the Anglican Communion. The official
representatives of the Episcopal Church, Ruth Meyers (Chair of the Standing Commission on Liturgy and
Music) and Thomas Ely (Bishop of Vermont and a member of the Commission), presented a summary of the
theological rationale and liturgical principles guiding the development of resources, along with a draft of the
liturgy. Not all participants in the IALC meeting supported the Episcopal Church’s decision to develop these
resources, but all joined in respectful conversation in a small-group format. In the written notes submitted
from the small groups, some stated that the work of the Episcopal Church would be helpful for their own
province, while others indicated that blessing same-sex relationships is not on the agenda for them.
Participants in the IALC conversation asked for development of the scriptural foundations for blessing samesex relationships and clarification of the concepts of blessing and covenant. They urged that the theological
and liturgical resources make clear that the Episcopal Church is envisioning these relationships as
monogamous and lifelong. Many found the liturgy to be strikingly similar to marriage. They encouraged
greater clarity in the liturgy about the nature of the covenant and a more robust form of blessing.
The task groups received a detailed report of the comments from the IALC meeting and took account of
them as they prepared the final draft of the resources.

Conclusion
“I will bless you,  God declared to Abraham, “so that you will be a blessing  (Genesis 12:2). The Commission
and its task groups have been reminded, at every step in this process, of the many blessings God has
bestowed on our Church. The unprecedented opportunities we have had to engage with our sister and
brother Episcopalians in every province of the Episcopal Church and with Anglicans from the wider Anglican
LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

12 of 158

Communion have illustrated for us the rich diversity of our life together in the Body of Christ. This work has
been a divine gift and a blessing to us, which we are eager to share.
We offer these resources with the hope that they will strengthen our shared witness in the Episcopal Church
to the love and grace of God in Christ. As in every other aspect of our life together as God’s people, we offer
these resources, not relying on ourselves alone, but on God, who “is able to accomplish abundantly far more
than all we can ask or imagine,  and always for the sake of God’s glory in Christ Jesus (Ephesians 3:20–21).
The Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music
November 2012

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

13 of 158

III. FAITH, HOPE, AND LOVE
Theological Resources for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships

Contents
III. Faith, Hope, and Love:
Theological Resources for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships
Preface
Overview: Theological Reflection on Same-Sex Relationships
1. The Church’s Call: A Focus on Mission
2. The Church’s Joy: A Theology of Blessing
3. The Church’s Life: Covenantal Relationship
4. The Church’s Challenge: Christian Unity and Biblical Interpretation
Responses to “Faith, Hope, and Love 
a. Thomas E. Breidenthal
b. John E. Goldingay
c. Deirdre Good
d. Dora Rudo Mbuwayesango
e. George R. Sumner
f. Fredrica Harris Thompsett

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

14 of 158

III. Faith, Hope, and Love
Theological Resources for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships

Preface
The Episcopal Church has been seeking, in various ways and over the last thirty years, to celebrate the
goodness of God, the grace of Christ, and the gifts of the Holy Spirit in the lives of our brothers and sisters
who are gay and lesbian. A series of General Convention resolutions during that time (1976–A069; 1985–
D082; 1991–A104; 1994–C020; 1994–C042; 1997–C003; 2000–D039; 2003–C051) has now led the Church to ask
the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music to “collect and develop theological and liturgical resources 
for the blessing of same-sex relationships (Resolution 2009–C056). In response to that call, we offer this
essay as a theological resource and invite the wider Church to reflect with us on how God is working today in
the committed relationships of same-sex couples.
For generations the Church has celebrated and blessed the faithful, committed, lifelong, monogamous
relationships of men and women united in the bonds of Holy Matrimony. In the Episcopal Church, the
marriage relationship is held in high regard, included as a “sacramental rite  by some,1 and as one of the
seven sacraments by others. The Commission has discovered in its work in response to Resolution 2009–
C056 that any consideration of the blessing of faithful, committed, lifelong, monogamous relationships of
same-sex couples cannot ignore the parallels to marriage, whether from practical, theological, or liturgical
perspectives. While this reality may well be inviting the Church to deeper conversation regarding marriage,
the similarities between marriage and the blessing of same-sex unions also illuminate our discussions in this
resource.
For some Episcopalians, this material will resonate well with their long-standing experience and theological
reflection; for others, the call from the 2009 General Convention represents a new and perhaps perplexing
moment in the life of our Church. We take that difference seriously. To the best of our ability, given the
mandate of Resolution 2009–C056 to “collect and develop theological and liturgical resources  for the
blessing of same-sex relationships, we address those who are eager to receive this theological resource
while also acknowledging that others have deep reservations about proceeding in this direction. All of us
belong equally to the Episcopal Church and to the worldwide Anglican Communion and, most of all, to the
universal Body of Christ. This theological resource honors the centrality of Scripture among Anglicans,
interpreted in concert with the historical traditions of the Church and in the light of reason.
An overview introduces and summarizes questions and major theological themes. Four sections follow the
overview, each expanding on the themes. While readers may engage with this material in a number of ways,
the order of the four sections, which we recommend following, reflects a particular theological approach to
this work. Section one affirms the understanding that everything we do as Christians is meant to express the
1

“An Outline of the Faith,  The Book of Common Prayer (New York: Church Hymnal Corporation, 1979), 860. Hereafter this edition of
the Prayer Book is cited as BCP.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

15 of 158

Church’s call to participate in God’s own mission in the world. The second section offers theological
reflections on blessing. The third considers blessing same-sex couples within the broader sacramental life of
the Church, especially in light of the theological significance of covenantal relationship. The fourth section
reflects on the challenge of living into our baptismal bond with each other in the midst of disagreements
over biblical interpretation.
In researching and preparing this essay, we discovered and recalled an abundance of resources in Scripture
and the traditions of the Church that have informed our response to Resolution 2009–C056. We now invite
the wider Church to further study and conversation, mindful that the apostle Paul described our shared life
in Christ as one marked by faith, hope, and love, the greatest of these being love (1 Corinthians 13:13).

Overview: Theological Reflection on Same-Sex Relationships
I give thanks to my God always for you because of the grace of God that has
been given you in Christ Jesus, for in every way you have been enriched in
him, in speech and knowledge of every kind—just as the testimony of Christ
has been strengthened among you—so that you are not lacking in any
spiritual gift as you wait for the revealing of our Lord Jesus Christ.
— 1 Corinthians 1:4–7

In 2009, the General Convention of the Episcopal Church asked for theological and liturgical resources for
the blessing of same-gender relationships (Resolution C056). In response to that call, we invite the Church to
reflect on the theological material collected and developed here for that purpose. In our theological
reflection, we have kept in view more than thirty years of deliberation at General Convention on these
matters, especially Resolution 2000–D039, which identified certain characteristics the Church expects of
couples living in marriage and other lifelong, committed relationships: “fidelity, monogamy, mutual affection
and respect, careful, honest communication, and the holy love which enables those in such relationships to
see in each other the image of God. 2 We understand couples who manifest this manner of life, with God’s
grace, to have entered into a covenant with each other, which presents a rich opportunity for theological
reflection.3
The theological themes in this resource, rooted in baptism, eucharist, and the paschal mystery of Christ’s
death and resurrection, offer ways to consider how the Church may appropriately bless lifelong, committed
covenantal relationships of same-sex couples. Such covenantal relationships can reflect God’s own gracious
covenant with us in Christ, manifest the fruits of the Spirit in holiness of life, and model for the whole
community the love of neighbor in the practice of forgiveness and reconciliation.
As the Commission responded to the charge to collect and develop theological resources, we focused our
attention on four areas of consideration. The first is mission: what does the Church believe these blessings
will contribute to God’s own work of redeeming and reconciling love in the world? Second, what does the
Church believe is happening when it pronounces God’s blessing? Third, what does the Church believe are the
distinguishing marks of a holy covenant? And, finally, what is the relationship between Christian unity and our
differing approaches to biblical interpretation regarding same-sex relationships? This overview introduces
and summarizes these areas, and the subsequent sections expand on each of them in turn.
2

Texts of these resolutions are included in the appendix to these resources. For a fuller discussion of the history of General
Convention resolutions and reports on these issues, see the appendix in To Set Our Hope on Christ: A Response to the Invitation of
Windsor Report ¶135 (New York: The Office of Communication, The Episcopal Church Center, 2005), 63–121.
3
As Paul Marshall points out, the marriage rite of the 1979 Book of Common Prayer uses the language of “covenant  (423). Marshall
notes that covenant-making is a key biblical motif, which makes it useful in our theological reflection on the committed relationships
of all couples (Same-Sex Unions: Stories and Rites [New York: Church Publishing, 2004], 40).

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

16 of 158

A Focus on Mission
Our starting point is Holy Baptism, which incorporates us into the Body of Christ and commissions us to
participate in God’s mission of reconciliation in the world (2 Corinthians 5:17–19). The purpose of this
reconciling mission is nothing less than the restoration of all people to “unity with God and with each other
in Christ. 4 One of the ways Christians participate in this mission is by witnessing to Christ in how we live in
our closest relationships. “By this everyone will know that you are my disciples,  Jesus said, “if you have love
for one another  (John 13:35).
As Christians, then, our closest relationships are not solely private. The Church has always affirmed the public
and communal dimension of our covenantal relationships. The character of our love, both its fruitfulness and
its failures, affects others around us. The Church, therefore, commissions a couple bound by sacred vows in
Holy Matrimony to participate in God’s mission of reconciliation. Such relationships are set apart for
precisely that divine purpose: to bear witness to and participate in the creating, redeeming, and sustaining
love of God.
This missional character of covenantal blessing, reflected in both Scripture and the historical traditions of the
Church, deserves renewed attention today. The 2000 General Convention contributed to this renewal when
it passed Resolution D039, which identified monogamy, fidelity, holy love, and other characteristics of
lifelong, committed relationships. Significantly, that resolution was framed as a way to enable the Church to
engage more effectively in its mission. Many in the Episcopal Church have witnessed these characteristics in
the committed relationships of same-sex couples. That recognition can, and in many places already has,
broadened the understanding of the Church’s mission of participating in God’s reconciling work in the world.

A Theology of Blessing
We understand the celebration and blessing of committed, monogamous, lifelong, faithful same-sex
relationships as part of the Church’s work of offering outward and visible signs of God’s grace among us.
“Blessing  exhibits a multifaceted character, yet the Church has always affirmed that blessing originates in
God, the giver of every good gift. The Church participates in God’s blessing of committed, covenantal
couples in three intertwined aspects: first, we thank God for the grace already discerned in the lives of the
couple; second, we ask God’s continual favor so that the couple may manifest more fully the fruits of the
Spirit in their lives; and third, we seek the empowerment of the Holy Spirit as the Church commissions the
couple to bear witness to the gospel in the world.
This threefold character of blessing, therefore, acknowledges what is already present—God’s goodness. The
Church’s blessing also sets the relationship apart for God’s purposes and prays for the divine grace the
couple will need to fulfill those purposes. Just as the blessing of bread and wine at the eucharist sets them
apart from ordinary usage and designates them for a particular, sacred purpose, so the public affirmation of
divine blessing in a covenantal relationship sets that relationship apart from other types of relationship.
The Church expects the blessing of a covenantal relationship to bear the fruits of divine grace in particular
ways—and always with God’s continual help and favor. This makes the couple accountable to the
community of faith as well as to God and to one another. The community, in turn, is held accountable for
encouraging, supporting, and nurturing a blessed relationship as the couple seeks to grow together in
holiness of life. Through its participation in the blessing of covenantal relationships, the Church is blessed by
the goodness of God, who continues to offer blessings in abundance, regardless of merit or circumstance. As
we live more fully into our call to discern, pronounce, seek, and return blessing wherever it may be found,
we find that we ourselves are blessed with joy.

4

“An Outline of the Faith,  BCP, 855.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

17 of 158

Covenantal Relationship
Reflecting theologically on same-sex relationships can become an occasion for the Church to reflect more
broadly on the significance of covenantal commitment in the life of faith. Both Scripture and our theological
traditions invite us to consider, first, the sacramental character of covenantal relationships; by this we mean
the potential of such relationships to become outward and visible signs of God’s grace. And second,
covenantal relationships can both reflect and inspire the eschatological vision of Christian life. The covenantal
commitments we make with each other, in other words, can evoke our desire for union with God, which is
our final hope in Christ.
Our understanding of covenant thus derives first and foremost from the gracious covenant God makes with
us in Christ. The many types of relational commitments we make carry the potential to reflect and bear
witness to that divine covenant. Here we have especially in mind the covenants made by intimate couples in
the sacred vows they make to enter into a public, lifelong relationship of faithful monogamy.
Scripture and Christian tradition encourage us to see in these intimate relationships a reflection of God’s
own desire for us. The long tradition of commentary on the biblical Song of Songs, for example, illustrates
this spiritual significance of sexual relationships. Hebrew prophets likewise turned frequently to the
metaphor of marriage to describe God’s commitment to Israel (Isaiah 62:5), an image the Pauline writer also
used to describe the relationship of Christ and the Church (Ephesians 5:21–33).
Covenantal commitments are thus shaped by and can also reflect the paschal mystery of Christ’s death and
resurrection, which the Church celebrates in baptism and eucharist. Intimate couples who live in a sacred
covenant find themselves swept up into a grand and risky endeavor: to see if they can find their life in God by
giving it to another. This dynamic reflects the baptismal life all of us share as Christians. As we live out our
baptismal vows throughout our lives, we are called to follow this pattern of God’s self-giving desire and love.
In the eucharist, we recall Christ’s willingness to give his life for the world: “This is my body, given for you. 
When two people give their lives, their bodies, to one another in a lifelong covenant, they can discover and
show how in giving ourselves we find ourselves (Matthew 16:25). When the Church pronounces God’s
blessing on the vows of lifelong fidelity—for different-sex and same-sex couples alike—the Church makes a
bold claim: the paschal mystery is the very root and source of life in the couple’s relationship.
This sacramental framework in which to reflect on same-sex relationships has, in turn, led us to consider
more carefully several other key theological themes: the vocational aspect of covenantal relationship; how
such a vocation is lived in Christian households; the fruitfulness of covenantal relationships in lives of service,
generosity, and hospitality; and mutual blessing, as God’s blessing in covenantal relationship becomes a
blessing to the wider community.

Christian Unity and Biblical Interpretation
Baptism binds us to God by binding us to one another. Salvation is inherently social and communal. This
bond, furthermore, does not depend on our agreement with one another but instead relies on what God has
done and is doing among us. In fact, our unity in God gives us room to disagree safely, ideally without threat
of breaking our unity, which is God’s own gift. This principle is the very foundation of all covenants,
beginning with the covenant between God and God’s people, exemplified in baptism, reflected in ordained
ministry, lived in vowed religious life and marriage, and encompassing the life of the Church. Our common
call as God’s people is not to find unanimity in all matters of faith and morals, but to go out into all nations as
witnesses to the good news of God in Christ.
Most Christians would, nonetheless, recognize limits to acceptable and legitimate differences. Beyond such
limits, unity becomes untenable. Those limits then pose difficult questions: How far is too far? What kind of
difference would constitute essential disunity? In the debate over same-sex relationships and biblical
interpretation, Episcopalians and other Christians throughout the Anglican Communion have disagreed
about the answers to these questions. Some Episcopalians have concluded that blessing such relationships
LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

18 of 158

has gone too far and, acting on their conscience, have parted company with the Episcopal Church, while
others who disagree have chosen to remain. As a Church, we continue to take different approaches to
interpreting Scripture as we consider same-sex relationships.
We who differ profoundly and yet desire unity more profoundly recall that the Church has held this creative
tension in the past. In Acts 15, we see that Paul differed from the community in Jerusalem over whether
circumcision and the observation of dietary laws should be required of Gentiles in order for them to be
baptized into Christ’s Body. This difference was a matter of biblical interpretation. As Church members held
the tension between their essential unity and their differences in how they understood Scripture, they found
themselves guided by the Holy Spirit.5
Since then, the Church has faced many other similar times of wrestling over differing views of Scripture
concerning a wide range of questions: whether vowed religious life takes priority over marriage, the
prohibition on lending money at interest, polygamous households, divorce and remarriage, contraception,
the institution of slavery, and the role of women in both Church and society, to name just a few. In all these
times, the Church has sought to follow the apostolic process of prayerful deliberation, which respects the
centrality of Scripture and attends carefully to the Spirit’s work among us. This process will not resolve all of
our disagreements, but we continue to trust in the unity that comes not from our own efforts but as God’s
gift to us and for which Christ himself prayed (John 17:11).
————
The following four sections expand on all of these theological themes and considerations, and we offer them
to the wider Church for ongoing, shared discernment as the Body of Christ. No one perspective or
community can fully capture the fullness of the truth into which the Spirit of God continually leads the
Church. In this work, then, as in every other matter of concern for the Church’s life and mission, we take to
heart Paul’s reminder that now “we know only in part  while awaiting that day when “the partial will come
to an end  (1 Corinthians 13:9–10). In that spirit of humility, in which no one knows fully, we offer this
theological resource on the blessing of same-sex relationships, trusting that it reflects a shared faith in the
gospel of Jesus Christ, inspires hope for that union with God which Christ has promised, and, above all,
expresses that love which shall not end (1 Corinthians 13:8).

1. The Church’s Call: A Focus on Mission
If anyone is in Christ, there is a new creation: everything old has passed
away; see, everything has become new! All this is from God, who reconciled
us to himself through Christ, and has given us the ministry of reconciliation;
that is, in Christ God was reconciling the world to himself, not counting their
trespasses against them, and entrusting the message of reconciliation to us.
— 2 Corinthians 5:17–19

The meaning and character of blessing play an important role in our shared calling to participate in God’s
own mission of reconciling love in the world. Pronouncing divine blessing takes many forms covering a wide
range of occasions. When the Church gathers to bless the exchanging of sacred vows in a covenantal
relationship, the blessing reflects a threefold action. First, the Church gives thanks for the presence of the
Spirit discerned in the lives of the couple. Second, the Church prays for the divine grace and favor the couple
will need to live into their commitment to each other with love, fidelity, and holiness of life. And third, the
Church commissions the couple to participate in God’s own mission in the world. This missional character of
5

This process of discernment over scriptural interpretation guided by the Holy Spirit has shaped every era in Christian history,
including Anglican approaches. See “An Outline of the Faith,  BCP, 853–54.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

19 of 158

covenantal blessing, reflected in both Scripture and the historical traditions of the Church, deserves renewed
attention today. While the Church gives thanks for God’s presence and blessing, the public affirmation of the
blessing of a covenantal relationship also sets that relationship apart for a sacred purpose: to bear witness
to the creating, redeeming, and sustaining love of God.
God’s promise to Abraham sets the tone for this missional understanding of blessing: “I will bless you, and
make your name great, so that you will be a blessing  (Genesis 12:2b). Through Moses, God’s promise
extends to the divine covenant with Israel, a people God chooses to receive divine gifts of protection,
guidance, and fruitfulness. In this covenantal relationship, God makes the people of Israel the stewards of
these gifts, not for their sake only, but to become a blessing for the world. As God declared to Jacob: “All the
families of the earth shall be blessed in you and in your offspring  (Genesis 28:14b). And as God also declared
through Isaiah: “It is too light a thing that you should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob and to
restore the survivors of Israel; I will give you as a light to the nations, that my salvation may reach to the end
of the earth  (Isaiah 49:6).
The earliest Christians likewise adopted this missional understanding of covenantal blessing as they
recognized that the grace they received in Christ was not for themselves alone but so that they could bear
witness to that grace “in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth  (Acts 1:8). Jesus
urged this view of the life of faith by reminding his listeners that “no one after lighting a lamp puts it under
the bushel basket, but on the lampstand, and it gives light to all in the house  (Matthew 5:15). In John’s
Gospel, Jesus models this divine mission by washing his disciples’ feet. This act of intimate service provided
the example his disciples were to follow in blessing others with the same life of service (John 13:14–15); the
love God shows for us in Christ, in other words, becomes a blessing for mission and ministry. The covenant of
grace God has made with us in Christ thus calls all of us to that life of service: “Like good stewards of the
manifold grace of God, serve one another with whatever gift each of you has received  (1 Peter 4:10).

Worship and Mission: An Eschatological Vision
Whenever the people of God gather for worship, we return to this foundational view in Scripture: God
continues to bless us through our covenantal relationship with Christ, and this blessing enables and
empowers us to provide a blessing to others. In all of the Church’s rites, from the Daily Office to the Holy
Eucharist, we give thanks for God’s blessings, and we pray for the grace we need to manifest that blessing in
the world, to “do the work [God has] given us to do. 6 This pattern appears in the marriage rite as well,
which celebrates God’s blessing on loving commitment, not for the sake of the couple alone, but for the
world, which stands in need of such witness to love and faithfulness. In that rite, the assembly prays for the
couple, that God will “make their life together a sign of Christ’s love to this sinful and broken world, that
unity may overcome estrangement, forgiveness heal guilt, and joy conquer despair. 7 God’s covenantal
blessing empowers the couple as missionaries of grace.
Moreover, the Church blesses and sends in order to lay claim to our part in the fulfillment of salvation
history; we collaborate with God as both proclaimers of and instruments for the new creation God is
bringing about. “The redemption of the world is not finished, and so human history is not finished. History is
going somewhere, and it is not there yet,  one theologian reminds us. “The church exists to be the thing
that God is doing, and to become the thing that God will be doing until the End.  What God has done and will
continue to do in the life of the Church manifests “not just the inherent goodness of creation but the
possibility of new creation, of healing and justice and forgiveness.  And so the Church blesses in order to
fulfill its “‘eschatological’ project of becoming the kingdom. 8

6

Postcommunion Prayer, BCP, 366.
BCP, 429.
8
Charles Hefling, “What Do We Bless and Why?  Anglican Theological Review 85:1 (Winter 2003): 91–93.
7

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

20 of 158

This eschatological vision of the Church’s life of worship and mission carries the potential to deepen our
shared reflection on the meaning of blessing itself. In blessing and being blessed, we join in the great work
of redemption that God has always been doing, is doing now, and will do until the End. Indeed, this
expansive view of blessing, rooted deeply in the covenant God has made with us in Christ, led Paul to declare
that God’s own mission of reconciliation has been entrusted to all those who have been blessed by this
promise of a new creation (2 Corinthians 5:17–19).

Same-Sex Relationships and the Church’s Mission
In responding to the call to participate in God’s mission in the world, the Church must attend carefully to the
particular cultural circumstances in which it proclaims the hope of the gospel. Over the last sixty years in the
United States (among other places), social, psychological, and biomedical sciences have contributed to a
gradual shift in cultural perspectives on the complexity of sexual orientation and gender identity. The
American Psychiatric Association, for example, no longer considers homosexuality to be a pathological
condition,9 which it did in the mid-twentieth century. Gay and lesbian people now participate openly in
nearly every profession and aspect of life. Many openly form stable and enduring relationships and some
also raise children in their families. Many churches, including the Episcopal Church, have also discerned in
same-sex relationships the same possibility of holiness of life and the fruits of the Spirit that we pray for in
those who seek the commitment of marriage and its blessings.10
This cultural shift concerning human sexuality bears on the Church’s pastoral care and also on its mission.
The 2000 General Convention, for example, identified certain characteristics that the Church expects of all
couples in lifelong, committed relationships: “fidelity, monogamy, mutual affection and respect, careful,
honest communication, and the holy love that enables those in such relationships to see in each other the
image of God. 11 Significantly, the Convention framed that resolution as a matter of mission. Witnessing the
Spirit at work in same-sex relationships, just as we do in different-sex relationships, can and in many places
already has broadened the Church’s understanding of how it participates in God’s own reconciling work in
the world.
Many gay and lesbian people (among others) who see same-sex couples exchange vows and receive a
blessing are moved, likewise, to seek the Church’s support for deepening their own commitments and
faithfulness. They, in turn, offer their gifts for ministry to the wider community, gifts that contribute to the
Church’s mission to “restore all people to unity with God and each other in Christ. 12 When the Church
pronounces God’s blessing on same-sex couples who are also raising children, those children can understand
better the sanctity of their own family, and the family itself can receive the same support and
encouragement from the Church that different-sex couples receive for their families. The blessing of samesex relationships in the community of faith can also become an occasion for reconciliation among estranged
family members, including those who have not understood or have even rejected their lesbian and gay
relatives.
Heterosexual people may also find their own vocations and ministries strengthened and empowered in
those moments of blessing, as they may do at the celebration of a marriage, or at the public profession of
commitment to a particular ministry or community. In other words, the gifts lesbians and gay men discern in
9

“All major professional mental health organizations have gone on record to affirm that homosexuality is not a mental disorder. In
1973, the American Psychiatric Association removed homosexuality from its official diagnostic manual, the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM).  From “Let’s Talk Facts about Sexual Orientation,  produced by the American Psychiatric
Association, http://www.healthyminds.org/Document-Library/Brochure-Library/Lets-Talk-Facts-Sexual-Orientation.aspx?FT=.pdf.
10
To Set Our Hope on Christ, 24–25. For a broader overview and analysis, see the collection of essays edited by Walter Wink,
Homosexuality and Christian Faith: Questions of Conscience for the Churches (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1999).
11
General Convention Resolution 2000–D039. Scripture reflects a similar approach to discerning evidence of divine grace and the
Spirit’s work when, for example, Jesus uses the analogy of assessing the goodness of a tree based on the kind of fruit it bears
(Matthew 7:16–18 and Luke 6:43).
12
“An Outline of the Faith,  BCP, 855.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

21 of 158

their own lives and committed relationships are not just for themselves alone. One Episcopal priest has
observed, “Over and over again, we see lesbians and gay men, people who would have been hiding in the
shadows of our church a generation ago, now coming forward to contribute their gifts, their strength and
loyalty and wisdom, freely and openly to the whole community of faith. And heterosexual people who have
seen this happening have also been freed to give more generously of themselves. 13
Friends of same-sex couples and many others in the general public also take note of these moments of
blessing, encountering the expansive and generous reach of gospel welcome. As friends witness the grace
of these covenantal commitments, and the generosity of the Church’s embrace, many of them will be drawn
to the community of faith, perhaps for the first time or after having left. Such has already been the case in
many congregations and dioceses in the Episcopal Church.

The Challenge of God’s Blessing for Mission
Scripture attests to significant moments in which biblical writers challenged their communities to expand
their vision of God’s saving work in the world or in which the writers were themselves challenged by that
divine word to see past their present horizons. The ancient Israelites, for example, had to struggle with how
far the blessing of their covenantal life would reach. Isaiah urged them to see all the nations—not just their
own—streaming to God’s holy mountain (Isaiah 2:1–4). The early Church was no exception to this struggle.
In the Acts of the Apostles, we read about Peter’s hesitation to cross traditional boundaries between the
clean and the unclean in his encounter with Cornelius, a Roman centurion (Acts 10). In a vision, Peter heard
God urging him to eat certain unclean animals in direct disobedience to the injunctions found in Leviticus 11.
This vision led Peter to consider anew whether God’s saving work and blessing might be found in places and
among particular people he had not before considered possible. When challenged about this expansive
vision, Peter declared, “God has shown me that I should not call anyone profane or unclean  (Acts 10:28). To
those who were startled and perhaps scandalized by the extension of the gospel to Gentiles, Peter asked,
“Can anyone withhold the water for baptizing these people who have received the Holy Spirit just as we
have?  (Acts 10:47).14
Time after time in the history of Israel and in the early Church, responding to the challenge of God’s
extravagant grace and the richness of divine blessing has expanded the mission of God’s people in the
world, even beyond where many had previously imagined. The loving faithfulness and covenantal
commitment of lesbian and gay couples presents a similar challenge to the Church today. Many throughout
the Episcopal Church and other Christian communions have recognized and discerned the Spirit’s presence
and work in these same-sex relationships, and are asking God’s people to ponder why we would withhold a
public affirmation and declaration of blessing from those who have received the Holy Spirit just as others
have. More importantly, however, this moment in the Episcopal Church’s life calls all of us to consider anew
the rich blessings we receive by God’s grace in Christ and through the Holy Spirit. These blessings, in turn,
animate the ministry of reconciliation that God has given us as ambassadors of the new creation that is
unfolding, even now, in our midst.

13

L. William Countryman, “The Big House of Classic Anglicanism,  from a speech given at the Claiming the Blessing Conference in St.
Louis, Missouri, in November 2002 and quoted in Claiming the Blessing, the theology statement of the Claiming the Blessing coalition,
page 11; http://www.claimingtheblessing.org/files/pdf/CTBTheology_Final_.pdf.
14
Paul describes his confrontation with Peter about these very issues in Galatians 2:1–21.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

22 of 158

2. The Church’s Joy: A Theology of Blessing
Whoever invokes a blessing in the land shall bless by the God of faithfulness.
— Isaiah 65:16
The disciples were continually in the temple blessing God.
— Luke 24:53

“Blessed are you, Lord God, ruler of the universe, who created everything for your glory!  This classic
blessing in Jewish tradition sets the tone for any theological reflection on what it means to bless and to
receive a blessing. Rather than ourselves, other people, animals, places, or things, God’s people first and
foremost bless God, the giver of life and creator of all. Discerning and giving thanks for the countless reasons
that we can and should bless God are, therefore, at the heart of the Church’s work in the world. Indeed, at
the heart of Christian worship is the eucharist, or “thanksgiving,  in which we lift up the “cup of blessing  (1
Corinthians 10:16).
In Anglican contexts, the Church’s work in the world is shaped by common prayer and worship. In addition
to reading the Scriptures and prayerful meditation, Anglicans have always relied on our shared liturgical life
for discerning where God is present and how God is calling us to live in the world as witnesses to the gospel
of Jesus Christ in the power of the Holy Spirit. While God is active always and everywhere, the community of
faith gathers to discern God’s activity and make it ever more visible.
Although ordained ministers are called to the Church’s work in a particular way, they share the work with the
whole community of the baptized. In their sacramental vocation, ordained ministers lead the community in
offering outward and visible signs of the inward and spiritual grace that is present among God’s people.
Clergy do not, in other words, “create grace  where there was none to be found already; rather, the whole
Body of Christ, in many and various ways, proclaims God’s gracious activity in our midst. This proclamation
offers the assurance of God’s grace promised to us in Christ Jesus and offers support as we strive to
manifest the fruits of the Spirit in our daily lives.
Many in the Episcopal Church and other Christian communions believe that the celebration and blessing of
the covenantal commitment of a same-sex couple also belongs in the Church’s work of offering outward and
visible signs of God’s grace. While “blessing  exhibits a multifaceted meaning, it always originates in God,
which the Church rightly and daily acknowledges: “We bless you for our creation, preservation, and all the
blessings of this life; but above all for your immeasurable love in the redemption of the world by our Lord
Jesus Christ; for the means of grace, and for the hope of glory. 15
The Church participates in this fundamental, divine blessing in three related ways: thanking God for God’s
goodness and favor; seeking God’s continued favor and grace so that we may manifest more fully that
gratitude in our lives; and receiving power from the Holy Spirit to bear witness to that grace in the world.
This threefold character of blessing acknowledges what is already present, God’s grace, but it does
something more as well: it establishes a new reality. Bread and wine, for example, when blessed at the
eucharistic table, are set apart from their ordinary use and designated for a particular, sacred purpose.
Similarly, the public affirmation of divine blessing in a covenantal relationship sets that relationship apart
from other types. God’s people expect such a blessing to bear the fruits of God’s grace in particular ways,
making a couple in such a blessed covenant accountable to the community of faith, as well as to God and to
each other. The community, in turn, is held accountable for encouraging, supporting, and nurturing a blessed
relationship as the couple seeks to grow together in holiness of life.
In short, the grace and blessing of God already discerned in a couple’s relationship does not thereby render a
liturgical rite of blessing redundant. To the contrary, the Church’s blessing performs what it declares, thus
15

“The General Thanksgiving,  BCP, 125.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

23 of 158

changing the couple and the Church. The couple becomes more fully aware of God’s favor and also receives
a particular role, as a couple, in the Church’s mission in the world; the Church is likewise changed, as holiness
of life is made more visible and as it receives and accepts its commission to support the couple in their life
and ministry.
Scripture guides us in this understanding of blessing by placing it in relation to both creation and covenant.
In Genesis, God declares the whole creation good, a source of blessing for which we thank God, the giver of
every good gift. This blessing is manifested in more particular ways in the covenant God makes with Noah
and, by extension, the whole of the creation (Genesis 9:8–16), with Abraham (Genesis 12:2–3), and, through
Moses, with the people of Israel (Deuteronomy 7:12–14). Likewise, the New Testament reflects God’s
blessing on all creation, as the Word of God becomes flesh in Jesus; it reflects the blessing of covenant as
well, as the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus reconcile us with God and assure us of God’s loving
faithfulness toward us and the whole creation. In his final meal with his disciples, Jesus blessed God for the
bread and cup as signs of the new covenant (Matthew 26:26–29). The blessing we receive by participating in
that meal at the eucharistic table strengthens us to live out in all of our relationships the forgiveness and
reconciliation to which that meal calls us.
Scripture bears witness to the relational character of blessing: being in relationship with God is not only a
blessing for us, but becomes a blessing to others as well. God’s covenant with Israel becomes a blessing not
for Israel alone but for “all the nations.  This is the very promise made to Abraham: “in you all the families of
the earth shall be blessed  (Genesis 12:3b). The extent of this divine blessing unfolded in Israel’s selfawareness over time and in various ways. “All the nations  referred, of course, to Gentiles, the very ones
many in Israel had not expected to share in God’s promises. God’s blessing thus expands the reach of
welcome and hospitality not only to the near and familiar neighbor, but also to the distant stranger, who is
made neighbor because of God’s own generosity. As Paul noted, through faith “in Christ Jesus the blessing
of Abraham might come to the Gentiles, so that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith 
(Galatians 3:14). The blessing of God’s covenant with us in Christ empowers us, through the Spirit, to offer
such expansive and generous blessing to the world, in thought, word, and deed. God’s blessings inspire us in
countless ways to live as emissaries of divine blessing in all that we do—in our work, our play, and our
relationships. In all of this, God’s goodness in our lives becomes a blessing to others, to neighbors both near
and far.
As Christians, baptism and eucharist focus our attention on the particular blessings of the paschal mystery of
Christ’s death and resurrection. Those blessings, in turn, encourage us to discern the many other ways God’s
blessing is manifested in both creation and covenant. The goodness of God makes everything in creation a
potential vehicle for blessing, including the love and faithfulness of covenantal relationship, in which we
experience our call to manifest divine goodness. Thus, the Church is continually discerning where the
goodness of God, the grace of Christ, and the gifts of the Holy Spirit are urging the Church to manifest God’s
blessing for others and, in response, to bless God with hearts and lives marked by gratitude and praise.
Another aspect of the biblical witness deserves attention as well: the emphasis on abundance. In the midst of
desert wanderings, Moses struck a rock and “water came out abundantly  for the people of Israel (Numbers
20:11). “Like the vine,  we read in Ecclesiasticus, “I bud forth delights, and my blossoms become glorious and
abundant fruit  (Ecclesiasticus 24:17). “You prepare a table before me,  declares the psalmist, and “my cup
overflows  (Psalm 23:5). “Give,  Jesus says, “and it will be given to you. A good measure, pressed down,
shaken together, running over, will be put into your lap  (Luke 6:38). And to the Christians in Corinth, Paul
declares, “God is able to provide you with every blessing in abundance, so that by always having enough of
everything, you may share abundantly in every good work  (2 Corinthians 9:8). Scripture invites us, in other
words, to see the blessing of God’s goodness, not as a scarce commodity either to hoard or to protect, but
rather as an unending font of deathless love and perpetual grace—a veritable embarrassment of divine
riches. In sacred covenantal relationship, God’s abundance is exhibited in many ways, including the
companionship, friendship, and mutual joy of intimacy. By affirming and publicly acknowledging that
blessing of abundance already present in vibrant covenantal relationships, including same-sex relationships,
LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

24 of 158

the Church expects those relationships to manifest the grace of God, the gifts of the Spirit, and holiness of
life.
Jesus’ iconic parable about the prodigal son adds a further layer to this biblical witness to God’s abundant
love and grace. In this story, God pours out the abundance of divine blessing on all, regardless of merit or
circumstance. When the prodigal son decides at last to return to his father’s house, hoping to be granted, at
best, the status of a slave, his father rushes to meet him and welcome him home, and even prepares a lavish
feast in his honor. “While he was still far off,  Jesus says, and thus well before the son could speak any
words of repentance, “his father saw him and was filled with compassion; he ran and put his arms around
him and kissed him  (Luke 15:20). In our lives, as in the parable, God showers us with blessings so that we
may receive life abundantly, even though we have in no way earned these blessings.
This parable suggests that the abundance of this household is more than sufficient to open outward to
receive the younger son. The abundance of this household is even more than sufficient for the resentful
elder son, who begrudges such celebration for his wayward brother. The household brims with abundance,
if only the elder son would open his heart to receive it (Luke 15:29–31). Both sons in Jesus’ parable stand as
potent reminders that the blessing of divine goodness does not automatically transform lives: we must be
willing to receive such blessing. And yet even when we are not willing, God will continue to offer blessings in
abundance. The teachings of Jesus return to this theme repeatedly, as in the parables of the sower (Mark
4:3–8) and the wedding banquet (Matthew 22:1–10), as well as the feeding of more than five thousand with
just five loaves of bread and two fish (Luke 9:12–17).
The Church’s participation in divine blessing can help each of us in various ways to be open to God’s
abundant goodness. The Church’s liturgical life, that is, our practice of common prayer and worship, can
create space for God’s people to open their hearts and minds to receiving the blessing God offers. For those
in a covenantal relationship, that intentional space (for both hearing the word of blessing in their lives and
blessing God in return) marks a significant, even an essential deepening and strengthening of their lives with
each other, with their community, and with God. In blessing covenantal relationships, just as in the eucharist,
we give thanks for God’s abundant goodness and pray for the continued presence of the Spirit to empower
us to do the work God has given us to do in the world. The blessing of the eucharistic table sets us apart as
the Body of Christ in the world, called and empowered to proclaim the gospel, just as the blessing of a
covenantal relationship sets that relationship apart as “a sign of Christ’s love to this sinful and broken world,
that unity may overcome estrangement, forgiveness heal guilt, and joy conquer despair. 16
Discerning, pronouncing, seeking, and returning blessing describe well the Church’s work. Even more, it is
the Church’s joy. Paul urged the Christians in Rome to “rejoice with those who rejoice, weep with those who
weep  (Romans 12:15). The early Christians gave themselves to such rejoicing, as they were “continually in
the temple blessing God  in their celebration of Christ’s victory over death (Luke 24:53). Whenever and
wherever the Church discerns particular instances of God’s abundant goodness, the Church rightly thanks
God for such a gift. We also ask God for the grace to live into that gift more fully, as we joyfully bear witness
to that blessing in the world.

16

The Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage, BCP, 429.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

25 of 158

3. The Church’s Life: Covenantal Relationship
Do you not know that all of us who have been baptized into Christ Jesus
were baptized into his death? Therefore we have been buried with him
by baptism into death, so that, just as Christ was raised from the dead
by the glory of the Father, so we too might walk in newness of life.
— Romans 6:3–4

Creation, Baptism, and Eucharist
Covenants have taken many different forms across time and in diverse cultural contexts. Both Scripture and
Christian history exhibit that diversity as well. The most familiar covenantal relationship is marriage, to which
both the Hebrew prophets and New Testament writers turned as a way to describe God’s desire and
commitment to be in relationship with us (Isaiah 62:5, Ephesians 5:21–33). Marriage itself has exhibited a
variety of forms over the centuries yet still provides a pattern for a number of significant covenantal
relationships, such as the vowed religious life or ordained ministry.
In 2000, General Convention identified certain characteristics that the Church expects to see in lifelong,
committed relationships: “fidelity, monogamy, mutual affection and respect, careful, honest
communication, and the holy love which enables those in such relationships to see in each other the image
of God  (Resolution D039). These characteristics describe well what we mean by “covenant  as we have
reflected theologically on same-sex relationships. A couple enacts their decision to enter into a lifelong
commitment of fidelity and accountability in the context of God’s household, the Church, by exchanging
vows, and the Church responds by pronouncing God’s blessing. Covenantal relationship then carries the
potential to reflect for the Church the gracious covenant God has made with us in the paschal mystery of
Christ’s death and resurrection, which the Church celebrates in baptism and eucharist.
Some will find this kind of theological reflection on same-sex relationships unfamiliar and perhaps
unwarranted. Many different-sex couples would likewise find this to be a new way of thinking about their
own marital vows. Thus, General Convention Resolution 2009–C056, which called for these theological
resources, becomes an opportunity for reflecting more broadly on the role of covenantal relationship in the
life of the Church. In doing so, the blessing of same-sex relationships can then be understood within the
broader framework of the Church’s sacramental life and its mission in the world.
The framework for covenantal relationship begins with God’s own declaration of the goodness of creation
(Genesis 1:31). That goodness inspires us to give thanks to God, the creator of all things. The heavens declare
God’s glory, the psalmist reminds us, and the earth proclaims God’s handiwork (Psalm 19:1). Thus, even in
creation’s fragility, limitation, and affliction, the biblical writers discerned signs of God’s providential power,
sustaining love, and saving grace. The Church celebrates God’s goodness in worship and with sacramental
signs of God’s blessing. These “outward and visible signs of inward and spiritual grace  manifest God’s
transforming presence and so are “sure and certain means by which we receive that grace. 17 Chief among
these signs are baptism and eucharist, which derive directly from the life and ministry of Jesus Christ.
Reconciliation, confirmation, marriage, ordination, and unction also manifest the grace of God at key
moments in Christian life, each in its own way, yet these are by no means the only occasions that do so.18 As
disciples of Jesus, the incarnate Word of God, we are called to make God’s creating, redeeming, and
sustaining love known in all things, in all circumstances, and throughout our daily lives and relationships. The
sacramental life of the Church focuses that calling in particular ways.

17
18

“An Outline of the Faith,  BCP, 857.
“An Outline of the Faith,  BCP, 857–58, 861.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

26 of 158

Baptism and eucharist recapitulate the arc of salvation history in creation, sin, judgment, repentance, and
redemption, or the fulfillment of the whole creation in the presence of God.19 In baptism, we are
incorporated into the paschal mystery of Christ’s death and resurrection, and we are empowered by the Holy
Spirit to live more fully into the holiness of life to which God calls all of us. This sacramental act manifests the
eternal covenant God has made with us, declaring that we are God’s own beloved, inheritors of God’s
promises, and God’s friends;20 we are sealed by God’s own Spirit and marked as Christ’s own forever.21 This
sign of God’s covenant is irrevocable, not relying on our adherence to the covenant but rather on the grace
and goodness of God in Christ Jesus. As members of the Body of Christ, we commit ourselves to live in the
manner of life appropriate to the body to which we belong. This manner of life is summed up in the two
great commandments: to love God with our whole being and to love our neighbors as ourselves.22 Even
though we inevitably fall far short of this commitment, God’s steadfast love maintains the covenant God has
made, and God both seeks and graciously enables our return to fidelity.
In the Episcopal Church, the significance of baptism for Christian faith and life became even clearer with the
ratification of the 1979 Book of Common Prayer. The Baptismal Covenant shapes the rite of Holy Baptism by
beginning with an affirmation of faith (the Apostles’ Creed), followed by five distinct promises made by (or
on behalf of) those being baptized: to continue in the apostles’ teaching and fellowship; to persevere in
resisting evil; to proclaim the Good News of God in Christ; to seek and serve Christ in all persons; and to
strive for justice and peace, respecting the dignity of all persons.23 The rite begins, in other words, with God’s
own Trinitarian mission of creating, redeeming, and sustaining love in the world. The promises we make are
in response to that divine mission and constitute our vowed commitment to participate in that mission—and
always “with God’s help.  This approach to baptismal theology continues to guide and inform our prayerful
discernment as Episcopalians, which is rooted first and foremost in the covenant God makes with us through
the Word of God made flesh (John 1:14).24
In the redemptive work of the Incarnation, God draws the whole creation back into union with God, lifting it
up through the resurrection and ascension of Christ toward its perfection, when God will be all in all (1
Corinthians 15:28). In the eucharist we celebrate this transformative action, accomplished through Christ’s
self-giving of his own Body and Blood, which nourishes our bodies and souls, equipping us to participate in
God’s own mission of reconciliation in the world.
In the eucharist, our fragmented lives are gathered together into one offering to God, the giver of all good
things. As a community gathered in prayer, we reaffirm our participation in God’s covenant as we hear God’s
holy word, confess and receive forgiveness of our sins, and join with the whole company of saints in prayer
for the Church and the world. God receives the gifts we bring, limited and flawed as they may be, blesses
them, and then returns them to us as bread from heaven. As we are nourished by the Body and Blood of
Christ, we are formed ever deeper in holiness of life, conforming to the likeness of Christ. At the table, we
are given a foretaste of the heavenly banquet in which all are gathered to God, a foretaste that clarifies and
strengthens our longing to witness to God’s love. As we are blessed and sent out, we are empowered by the
Holy Spirit to participate in God’s work of bringing all things to that sanctification and fullness for which God
created them. Moreover, as we celebrate eucharist together, we recall all the other tables that we gather
around in our various households and come to see them as places where Christ is present. This eucharistic
pattern—often described with the actions take, bless, break, and give—shapes all the relationships that we
bring into our baptismal life with God. We take these relationships, bless God for their goodness, ask God to
19

See “Thanksgiving over the Water,  BCP, 306–307; Romans 8:18–25; and 1 Corinthians 15:28.
“I do not call you servants any longer, … but I have called you friends  (John 15:15). See also Gregory of Nyssa, who understood
our incorporation into the Body of Christ to make us God’s own “friends  (Orat. in 1 Cor. xv.28 ).
21
Holy Baptism, BCP, 308.
22
See Deuteronomy 6:5, Leviticus 19:18, and Matthew 22:37–40.
23
BCP, 304–305.
24
See Louis Weil, A Theology of Worship, The New Church’s Teaching Series, vol. 12 (Cambridge, MA: Cowley Publications, 2002),
11–22.
20

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

27 of 158

bless them and break them open further to divine grace, so that we may give them to the world as witnesses
to the gospel of Jesus Christ.
Baptism and eucharist, as sacraments of God’s covenant of creating, redeeming, and sustaining love, shape
our lives as Christians in relation to God and to God’s creation; this calls us to live with love, compassion,
justice, and peace toward all creatures, friend or foe, neighbor or stranger. We are not only called to live in
this way but also strengthened to do so by our participation in these sacramental acts. The sacramental life
of the Church strengthens us to give ourselves and to receive others as we contribute to the coming of
God’s realm “on earth as it is in heaven  (Matthew 6:10) and proclaim Christ until he comes again (1
Corinthians 11:26).
Through baptism and eucharist we are brought into and sustained in all these many and various
relationships. First and foremost among them is our relationship with the God who creates, redeems, and
sustains us. We also participate in countless other relationships with the many diverse people, communities,
and institutions that we encounter throughout the world. All of these relationships call us to bear witness to
the gospel precisely because our lives as creatures of God are constituted in relation; we are created in the
Trinitarian image of God, an image that is inherently relational and rooted and grounded in love.25
Accordingly, same-sex relationships belong in that extensive network of relations in which we are called to
bear witness to the gospel. In the next section, we consider the blessing of same-sex relationships in that
broader context, beginning with the fundamental call all of us share to love our neighbors as ourselves.
Since God calls us into particular forms of loving commitments with others, we turn in the following sections
to three interrelated aspects of that calling: covenant-making, intentional Christian households, and faithful
intimacy.

Loving Our Neighbors as Ourselves
Christians strive to model all of our relationships on the love, grace, and compassion of Christ, loving our
neighbors, both near and distant, as we love ourselves. Loving others is possible only because of the grace
of God, who first loved us (1 John 4:19). Baptism and eucharist continually send us out to all our neighbors,
where we learn again and again the blessing of offering ourselves and receiving others in gospel hospitality.
Hospitality means more than good manners. Scripture regards hospitality toward both friend and stranger
as evidence of covenantal obedience and fruitfulness.26 The story of Sodom’s destruction in Genesis 19, a
particularly dramatic biblical reminder of the importance of hospitable relations, has been frequently cited
by opponents of blessing same-sex relationships. However, such interpretations of this passage rely less on
the biblical story itself than on the cultural reception of this story over many centuries of European history.27
The narrative in this passage turns on whether certain visitors to Sodom will be received graciously and
hospitably by the city’s inhabitants or instead will be exploited and even raped. The sin of Sodom’s citizens
thus refers explicitly to the codes of hospitality in the ancient Near East rather than to same-sex sexual
relations.28 Other biblical writers who refer to Sodom never highlight sexuality—or mention it at all. Ezekiel’s
25

“An Outline of the Faith,  BCP, 845.
See Exodus 22:21, Leviticus 19:34, Deuteronomy 24:19–21, Malachi 3:5, and Hebrews 13:2, among many others. For an overview and
analysis of the centrality of hospitality in Scripture and in early Christianity, see Amos Yong, Hospitality and the Other: Pentecost,
Christian Practices, and the Neighbor (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 2008).
27
The term “sodomy,  for example, does not appear in Scripture, and what it has come to mean (including within North Atlantic
jurisprudence) is not supported by the biblical references to it. See Jay Emerson Johnson, “Sodomy and Gendered Love: Reading
Genesis 19 in the Anglican Communion,  in The Oxford Handbook of the Reception History of the Bible, ed. Michael Lieb, Emma Mason,
and Jonathan Roberts (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 413–34; and Michael Carden, Sodomy: A History of a Christian Biblical
Myth (London: Equinox Publishing, 2004).
28
The definition of “sodomy  varied widely throughout Christian history and coalesced exclusively around a particular sexual act
between men only in the eleventh century; see Mark D. Jordan, The Invention of Sodomy in Christian Theology (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1997).
26

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

28 of 158

interpretation, for example, is quite direct: “This was the guilt of your sister Sodom: she and her daughters
had pride, excess of food, and prosperous ease, but did not aid the poor and needy  (Ezekiel 16:49).29 Jesus
evokes the story of Sodom not to teach about sexual ethics but in the context of sending out his disciples to
minister. Those who do not receive his disciples, he promises, will suffer a fate worse than the citizens of
Sodom (Matthew 10:15). The threat underscores the centrality of hospitality in that ancient story.30
As early as the 1950s, biblical scholars attempted to place Genesis 19 in its original cultural context and to
revive an interpretive approach to that story that resonated with the intrabiblical witness to it.31 In this
interpretation, Genesis 19 applies to all people rather than only to some, and the lesson for all is the primacy
of hospitality, or the love of neighbor, as Jesus himself commanded.32 We manifest this love of neighbor in
countless ways, each instance shaped by the particular individual or community we encounter, whether in
our own family, or with coworkers, or strangers.
Relationships, in other words, take many different forms. At times, we choose particular relationships based
on our own preferences, needs, or desires; at other times, we are in relationships without a lot of choice, as
with colleagues at work or fellow travelers. No matter which, the “neighbor  offers us an occasion for
manifesting the love of God in Christ. The gospels proclaim not only the self-giving love Jesus showed to the
disciples he chose, but also the love Jesus urged for the stranger encountered by chance, as in the parable of
the good Samaritan (Luke 10:29–37). Christ sets the example for us to follow in all of our many and varied
relationships, a model that respects the dignity of every person and that encourages giving oneself for the
good of the other.33 Relationships are “schools for virtue  and formation, that is, opportunities for us to
form dispositions and habits that manifest Christ-like love.
As people joined with God and to each other by baptism and eucharist, we are called to embody in all of our
relationships—those we may consider personal or private and those we consider corporate or public—a love
that is both self-giving and other-receiving. As we endeavor to respond to this calling, we depend on God’s
grace as we are gradually brought by the Spirit into that union with God for which Christ himself prayed
(John 17:11). We also serve as living proclamations of God’s creative, redeeming, and sustaining love for the
world. Given our limitations, that witness is inevitably imperfect and sometimes ambiguous, yet we continue
to trust that all things are working together for good (Romans 8:28) as we shape our lives and relationships
to the pattern of God’s own love for us and for the world. That pattern may then lead into particular forms
of commitment in which we discern a call to covenantal relationship.

Called into Covenant
Some loving relationships with our neighbors exhibit a particular depth of commitment, which can lead to an
intentional covenant with another person or with a community. Scripture bears witness to the significance
29

Ezekiel’s description represents the approach most often taken by writers in the Hebrew Bible, in which the sin of Sodom is always
associated with violence or injustice; see Robin Scroggs, The New Testament and Homosexuality: Contextual Background for
Contemporary Debate (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1983). In the New Testament, Jude 7 is sometimes cited as well, yet that verse
does not describe “sexual immorality  precisely (it could refer to rape, for example); the “unnatural lust  of Sodom’s inhabitants
could also mean that the strangers sent to Sodom were actually angels (see Genesis 6:4).
30
Patristic writers viewed hospitality as central. See, for example, Origen, Homilia V in Genesim (PG 12:188–89): “Hear this, you who
close your homes to guests! Hear this, you who shun the traveler as an enemy! Lot lived among the Sodomites. We do not read of
any other good deeds of his … [save] he opened his home to guests ; Ambrose of Milan, De Abrahamo 1:6:52 (PL 14:440): Lot
“placed the hospitality of his house—sacred even among a barbarous people—above the modesty [of his daughters].  Cited by John
Boswell, Christianity, Tolerance, and Homosexuality: Gay People in Western Europe from the Beginning of the Christian Era to the
Fourteenth Century (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980), 98.
31
One of the earliest examples of this approach was Derrick Sherwin Bailey, Homosexuality and the Western Christian Tradition
(London: Longmans, Green, 1955).
32
Some biblical scholars continue to interpret the story as a condemnation of homosexual behavior. See, for example, Robert A. J.
Gagnon, The Bible and Homosexual Practice: Texts and Hermeneutics (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 2001), 71–91.
33
“The Baptismal Covenant,  BCP, 305.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

29 of 158

of covenant-making in many ways but especially as an expression of God’s blessing, such as the covenant
God makes with the whole of creation through Noah (Genesis 9:9–13) and with the people of Israel through
Abraham (Genesis 12:2–3). Christians celebrate the covenant that Jesus proclaimed and enacted at the final
meal he shared with his disciples (Luke 22:20) and which we mark with the “cup of blessing  (1 Corinthians
10:16) at the eucharistic table.
Scripture invites us, in other words, to see our covenantal commitments with each other as particular
expressions of the love of both God and neighbor as well as expressions of God’s blessing. As we commit
ourselves to the good of the other, we offer that commitment as a witness to God’s covenantal love for the
world. We discover God’s blessing in these covenantal commitments as we are able, more and more, to
manifest consistent regard and respect for the other, even as we struggle with our own limitations and
flaws. We discover God’s blessing even further as we realize, in ever newer ways, how a covenantal
relationship can enhance and contribute to the well-being of others, of neighbors, strangers, the Church, and
the world.
People who enter a covenant promise each other, a community, and God that their shared future will take a
particular shape, one for which they intend to be held accountable, not only by their covenant partners but
also by the wider community.34 While the Canons of the Episcopal Church describe marriage as a union of a
man and a woman, the patterns of marriage can help us understand other kinds of covenantal relationship,
such as vowed religious life and the commitments of same-sex couples. In all of these covenantal
relationships, the partners promise to be trustworthy, to remain faithful to one another despite other
demands on their time and energy or possibilities for engagement with others. The partners promise to
accompany and assist each other in faithfulness; they pledge their support for the well-being of the other.
These relationships are directed toward vitality and fruitfulness as they contribute to human flourishing,
within and beyond the relationship. The depth of this covenantal commitment means it is a vocation, a life of
faithfulness to which some are called by God and which God blesses, so that, by God’s grace, that blessing
will be made manifest to the world.
Recognizing God’s blessing and the work of the Spirit in relationships of lifelong commitment, the Church
rightly celebrates these moments of covenantal vocation. This divine calling, discerned by a couple and their
faith community, draws the Church deeper into God’s own mission of redeeming and sanctifying love in the
world. Christians express this calling in the ways we live our lives with others. Two of these ways deserve
attention here: shaping households and deepening faithful intimacy.

The Vocation of Households
Households today are most often associated with marriage and child-rearing, yet this has not always been
the case. The history of the Church offers a broader view of how households can bear witness to the gospel.
Since it is finally God, and not another human being or anything else in creation, that fulfills and completes
us, some people feel called to remain unmarried or single. A single life, which is not necessarily the same as a
solitary life, can be lived in households of various types. Living in this way can allow individuals to be more
available as friends and companions; this is often the case with vowed religious life, such as a monastic
calling. Indeed, for the first half of its history (more than a thousand years), the Church understood vowed
religious life as a calling higher than marriage, a view that changed decisively only during the Protestant
Reformation. The diverse forms of an intentional single life may afford greater opportunity for
contemplation, service, and mission, which some people understand as a particular vocational calling into
deeper relationship with God and the world. This seems to be Paul’s understanding of the spiritual
significance of remaining unmarried (1 Corinthians 7:25–32).
Paul also discusses human sexuality in relation to God’s gracious covenant with us in Christ in the first
chapter of his letter to the Romans. This chapter, especially verses 26–27, has been used to support the
34

See Margaret A. Farley, Personal Commitments: Beginning, Keeping, Changing (New York: HarperCollins, 1990).

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

30 of 158

Church’s reluctance to embrace the loving faithfulness of same-sex couples and continues to influence
conversation in Christian communities.
In interpreting this Pauline passage, it is difficult to know precisely what Paul meant by “unnatural  in those
verses and to whom he was addressing these concerns.35 Significantly, Paul’s description of sexual behavior
in the first chapter appears in direct relation to his condemnation of idolatry. For Paul, the consequence—
not the cause—of worshiping false gods is a distorted understanding of sexuality, its purpose and goal
(Romans 1:22–23). In the Greco-Roman world of the first century, those distortions of sexuality with which
Paul was most likely familiar included a range of practices associated with cults devoted to fertility gods and
goddesses. Some interpreters have claimed that these cultic rituals may have included self-castration,
drunken orgies, and sex with young male and female temple prostitutes.36 Christians rightly condemn all
those behaviors as violations of the human body, the very temple of the Holy Spirit, Paul insisted (1
Corinthians 3:16–17). Moreover, some interpreters say, those alleged ancient cultic practices have nothing to
do with today’s same-sex Christian couples.37
Paul’s broader insight, however, still compels the Church to continual discernment and assessment of its
common life: proper worship corresponds directly to proper sexual relations. This insight can shed even
further light on Paul’s recommendation to the Christians in Corinth that they remain unmarried.
In the end, human sexual relationships of any kind are not the purpose or goal of human life. Instead, union
with God in Christ is the goal for all, including the whole created order, as the rest of Paul’s letter to the
Romans makes clear (Romans 8:18–25). At their best, human relationships can only point us toward that final
fulfillment. People who make an intentional decision to remain unmarried place important signposts on that
spiritual journey to which all of us are called and in which nothing, including marriage, should supplant our
primary devotion to God and to God’s household, the Church.
Other types of relationships teach us that to prepare us for life with God, God can bind us with another for
life. Thus, some (though not all) covenantal commitments are enacted in households, those intimate spaces
where people encounter each other as their nearest neighbors daily and continually.38 Clearly, the character,
shape, and form of a household have varied enormously over time, from the patriarchal and polygamous
families of ancient Israel to the family Jesus created between his mother and his beloved disciple (John
19:26–27) and the economic reordering of familial relations among early believers (Acts 4:32–37, 5:1–7). What
“household  means and how people may be called, as a vocation, into covenantal households matter not
only in light of historical differences but also in the midst of the wide range of household customs and
organizational patterns found throughout the world today.
Appreciating the significant cultural differences between the households of ancient Israel and today’s
Western, nuclear families can also inform our interpretation of two biblical passages cited as a scriptural
warrant for rejecting the loving faithfulness of same-sex couples: Leviticus 18:22 and its analogue, 20:13.
These two verses belong to an extensive array of dietary restrictions, commandments, and ritual practices
often referred to as the “Levitical holiness code.  Two features of ancient Israelite society are important in

35

See L. William Countryman, Dirt, Greed, and Sex: Sexual Ethics in the New Testament and Their Implications for Today, revised edition
(Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2007), 119–123. See also Dale B. Martin, “Heterosexism and the Interpretation of Romans 1:18–32,  in
Sex and the Single Savior: Gender and Sexuality in Biblical Interpretation (Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 2006), 51–64. Some
interpreters have noted that Paul uses the phrase often translated as “contrary to nature  in Romans 1 again in Romans 11:24 to
describe the love of God in saving those same Gentiles; see William Stacy Johnson, A Time to Embrace: Same-Gender Relationships in
Religion, Law, and Politics (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing Company, 2006), 98–99.
36
For the controversy over ancient fertility cults and the alleged sexual practices associated with them, see Robert A. Oden, Jr., The
Bible Without Theology: The Theological Tradition and Alternatives to It (San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1987), especially chapter 5,
“Religious Identity and the Sacred Prostitution Accusation,  131–153.
37
See Martti Nissinen, Homoeroticism in the Biblical World: A Historical Perspective (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1998), 103–113.
38
Thomas E. Breidenthal, Christian Households: The Sanctification of Nearness (Eugene, Oregon: Wipf and Stock, 2004).

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

31 of 158

interpreting these difficult passages: the process of constructing a religious identity for Israel distinct from
its surrounding cultures, and the strict gender hierarchy of the ancient Mediterranean world.39
Leviticus 18:22 condemns sex between men, and, more particularly, treating a man like a woman. The
Hebrew word used for this condemnation, translated as “abomination,  appears most often with reference
to the cultic practices associated with the worship of foreign gods; similar condemnations of child sacrifice
and bestiality in Leviticus 18 strengthen the connection to idolatrous rituals.40 Equally important, patriarchy
placed a high premium on male privilege. Sexual practices reflected this gendered ordering as men were
expected to take an active role and women a passive one, reflecting and perpetuating male dominance in all
other spheres of cultural and religious life and reinforcing the treatment of women as property. Sexual
relations in the ancient Near Eastern cultural context were defined by who had power over whom. So,
according to this worldview, sex between men would violate male privilege and disrupt the patriarchal
ordering of society.41
Ancient Israelite culture, which the Levitical holiness code was meant to uphold, differs significantly from the
egalitarian ideals toward which many Christian families strive in modern Western culture (and indeed in
other locales as well).42 Likewise, the distinctive concerns shared by both the ancient Israelites and Paul to
reject the sexual practices associated with idolatrous cults are in no way applicable to the lives of faithful
Christians today who identify themselves as gay or lesbian. These historical and cultural differences,
however, do not render these biblical passages irrelevant: Scripture continues to bear witness to the primacy
of covenantal relationship with the one true God of Israel, whom Christians believe and proclaim is revealed
decisively in the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ. Scripture would have us make that divine
covenant primary in the ordering of our household relations in culturally appropriate ways.
In households formed by married different-sex couples and covenanted same-sex couples alike, the process
of conforming to the likeness of Christ and striving toward holiness of life unfolds in deeply shared
accountability. The couple continually attempts to place their desires within the vows and commitments
they have made to each other. Living together in a household may provide the stability which makes
possible the vulnerability necessary to self-giving and other-receiving.43 In a household, the members of the
couple become one another’s nearest neighbor so that they may grow together in the love of God. The
household shelters the daily practice, which Jesus urged, of finding one’s life by giving it to another.
For same-sex couples as for married different-sex couples, households provide the structure for the daily life
of covenanted closeness: laboring to provide for one another and to support family, organizing a household
and its daily table, maintaining and sharing property, caring for another in sickness and at death.44
39
Insights from Jewish commentators and scholars on these and other important aspects of biblical interpretation deserve renewed
attention in Christian communities. See, for example, Steven Greenberg, Wrestling with God and Men: Homosexuality in the Jewish
Tradition (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2004); and Daniel Boyarin, Carnal Israel: Reading Sex in Talmudic Culture (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1995).
40
See Nissinen, Homoeroticism in the Biblical World, 37–56. Paul would likely have known the connection between the Levitical
holiness code and idolatrous cults as well, which lends further support to interpreting the first chapter of Romans with reference to
temple prostitution.
41
Jack Rogers, Jesus, the Bible, and Homosexuality: Explode the Myths, Heal the Church, revised edition (Louisville: Westminster John
Knox Press, 2009), 68–69.
42
The treatment not only of women but also of children as property, as well as the practice of keeping concubines and slaves in
ancient Mediterranean households, mark these differences even further. See Carol L. Meyers, “Everyday Life: Women in the Period
of the Hebrew Bible,  in Women’s Bible Commentary, ed. Carol A. Newsom and Sharon H. Ringe, expanded edition (Louisville:
Westminster John Knox Press, 1998), 251–59; Gale A. Yee, Poor Banished Children of Eve: Woman as Evil in the Hebrew Bible
(Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2003), 29–58; and Amy L. Wordelman, “Everyday Life: Women in the Period of the New Testament,  in
Women’s Bible Commentary, 482–88.
43
Rowan Williams, “The Body’s Grace,  in Our Selves, Our Souls and Bodies: Sexuality and the Household of God, ed. Charles Hefling
(Cambridge, MA: Cowley Publications, 1996), 58–68.
44
See Deirdre J. Good, Willis J. Jenkins, Cynthia B. Kittredge, and Eugene F. Rogers, Jr., “A Theology of Marriage including Same-Sex
Couples: A View from the Liberals,  Anglican Theological Review 93:1 (Winter 2011): 63–64.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

32 of 158

Households may be schools for virtue and for penance and reconciliation, as well as habitations of mutual
support and joy, places for glimpsing and also deepening our experience of the presence of God. People
living alone, who are single, bereaved, or divorced, are also called to live out their baptismal vocation by the
love, service, hospitality, and accountability of their relationships within the Church and in the communities
of which they are a part, as well as through their service of prayer to others.
A household formed by a couple in a covenantal relationship can remind all of us of our incorporation into
the paschal mystery through baptism, in which we are received into the household of God and encouraged
to “confess the faith of Christ crucified, proclaim his resurrection, and share … in his eternal priesthood. 45
In their household, a couple faces the many ways in which their faith forms their daily lives. They offer
themselves daily to each other in order to become part of the other’s life, dying to sin and rising to a new life
directed toward love of neighbor and love of God. In this giving of self and receiving of another, we see the
gracious pattern of God’s own triune life into which we are, more and more, caught up and transformed for
mission.
In households we also see an image of the eucharist. The household tables around which couples in
covenantal relationship gather evoke the eucharistic table around which we gather as the community of
believers. In the household, as at the eucharist, couples take what is given to them and offer it to God. They
are nourished and blessed by what they receive, and the Spirit then empowers them to be a blessing to
others and to God. In a household, as at the eucharistic table, what God has joined together may become
one body, and the Spirit may distribute a household’s gifts to many. In households, same-sex as well as
different-sex couples in covenantal relationships strive to imitate Jesus, who gave himself bodily for those he
loved.
To give one’s self over to love, care, and commitment in solidarity with another person, for better for worse,
in sickness and in health, till death do us part, is daily and bodily to partake in the reconciling work of God in
Christ. In the lives of intimate couples, sexual desire for one another can be forged into covenantal witness
to the gospel.

Faithful Intimacy
The movement from sexual desire into faithful intimacy and covenantal commitment marks a particular kind
of vocational path, which for Christians shapes the passion of eros into the affection of agape for the good of
the Church and the world. Theological reflection on this path begins by affirming the goodness of sexual
desire itself. Indeed, sexual desire is a metaphor for God’s desire to be in relationship with us and the whole
creation. Scripture and Christian tradition draw on sexually intimate relationships to point to the God who is
Love and who stands in relationships of love with all creation. The long tradition of commentary on the
biblical Song of Songs, for example, illustrates the spiritual significance of sexual relationships and the
fruitfulness of reflecting theologically on the commitment of sexually intimate couples.46 In such reflection,
we can realize and appreciate that “the whole story of creation, incarnation, and our incorporation into the
fellowship of Christ’s body tells us that God desires us.  The good news of God’s desire for us can then shape
our intimate commitments and the life of the wider Christian community so that all of us may see ourselves
as desired, as “the occasion of joy. 47
The gift of human sexuality, established by God in creation, can be a source of sustaining joy, reminding us
bodily of the abundance God intends for the whole creation. In the mutual self-offering of one to another in
a sexual relationship of fidelity, we can catch a glimpse of the delight God exhibits for each of us. Yet sexual
desire is also fraught with risk because it draws us into relationships of vulnerability, where not only the
45

Holy Baptism, BCP, 308.
David M. Carr, The Erotic Word: Sexuality, Spirituality, and the Bible (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003). See also Douglas
Burton-Christie, “Into the Body of Another: Eros, Embodiment and Intimacy with the Natural World,  Anglican Theological Review 81:1
(Winter 1999): 13–37.
47
Williams, “The Body’s Grace,  in Our Selves, Our Souls and Bodies, 59.
46

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

33 of 158

brightest and best dimensions of ourselves are offered to another but also where the painful aspects are
exposed, the ones that we often prefer to keep hidden and that need healing. Sexual desire and intimacy
make us vulnerable so that God can turn our limits to our good, showing us that we are not our own but
belong to someone else.
Faithful relationships of sexual intimacy can also be an occasion to bear witness to God’s love as they form
the couples more fully in the image of Christ. In marriage, the Church blesses and celebrates these
relationships as potential vehicles for God’s grace. Many in the Episcopal Church today have come to believe
that this is as true for same-sex couples as it is for different-sex couples.48 Others, however, understand the
doctrine of creation differently and believe that God’s gift of human sexuality is intended only for differentsex couples. Even the language of “same-sex  and “different-sex  raises many complex questions, not only
biologically, socially, and culturally, but also and especially biblically.
Genesis 1 and 2, for example, are often cited to support two interrelated convictions: first, that “gender
complementarity  describes God’s creation of human beings as male and female; and second, that such
complementarity is best expressed in the procreation of children within monogamous marriage. The
extensive biblical scholarship available on these passages—in both Jewish and Christian traditions—nuances
those two convictions in some important ways.
In the first of the two creation accounts (Genesis 1:26–27), gender differentiation is attributed to the whole
human species rather than to individuals, just as both male and female alike apply to God, in whose image
humanity is made.49 Similarly, the command to “be fruitful and multiply  (Genesis 1:28) is given to the human
species, not to each individual. If this were not the case, people “who are single, celibate, or who for
whatever reason do not have children—including Jesus of Nazareth —would be viewed as “disobedient
sinners. 50 Moreover, the generative aspects of a loving and faithful commitment can be seen in many
different ways, not only in bearing and raising children. For same-sex couples, as one Episcopal bishop has
pointed out, “the care and nurture of those already in the world may be a mission more excellently fulfilled
by those who do not have the concerns of child-rearing. 51
The second account in Genesis refers specifically to the creation of distinct individuals (Genesis 2:7–22), and
introduces something that is not good in God’s creation: “It is not good,  God declares, “for the human
being to be alone. 52 Here the story turns on the importance of companionship and not, as in the first
account, on the procreation of children. Significantly, the companion God provides for the solitary human is
not defined by “otherness  but by suitable similarity. In this passage, “there is no emphasis … on
‘difference’ or ‘complementarity’ at all—in fact, just the opposite. When Adam sees Eve, he does not
celebrate her otherness but her sameness: what strikes him is that she is ‘bone of my bones, flesh of my
flesh.’  Reducing this story to the fitness of particular anatomical parts misses the poignancy of this story:
“God sees the plight of this first human being and steps in and does whatever it takes to provide him with a
life-giving, life-sustaining companion. 53 Rather than focusing on marriage, these creation accounts affirm
God as the creator of all things and “the priority of human companionship. 54
Genesis 1 and 2 can and should continue to shape, inform, and energize the Church’s faithful witness to the
God revealed in Scripture. These passages can do so as the Church proclaims God as the creator and affirms
48

To Set Our Hope on Christ, 8–9, 24–25.
Some ancient Talmudic commentaries suggest, for example, that the original human shared with God all of the possible gender
characteristics, which were later divided between “male  and “female.  This text, in other words, raises a host of questions which
the text itself does not address concerning gender and sexuality in both humanity and God. See Howard Eilberg-Schwartz, ed.,
People of the Body: Jews and Judaism from an Embodied Perspective (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992).
50
Johnson, A Time to Embrace, 115–16.
51
Marshall, Same-Sex Unions, 38.
52
Genesis 2:18 (for the significance of this translation of the verse, see Johnson, A Time to Embrace, 114–115, 117).
53
Johnson, A Time to Embrace, 120.
54
Johnson, A Time to Embrace, 114.
49

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

34 of 158

the goodness of God’s creation, which includes the dignity of every human being as created in God’s image.
This affirmation remains vital, not least for the sake of embracing the full humanity of women. The
unqualified dignity with which the biblical writer treated both men and women in the account of their
creation stands out as quite remarkable in the patriarchal culture in which it was written.55
Paul, furthermore, would urge Christians to read the Genesis accounts of creation through the lens of the
new creation, which God has promised in Christ, the first fruits of which God has provided by raising Christ
from the dead (1 Corinthians 15:20–25). Living into that promise and anticipating its fulfillment, Paul urged
the Christians in Galatia to understand their baptism as erasing familiar social and cultural hierarchies: “As
many of you as were baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ. There is no longer Jew or
Greek, there is no longer slave or free, there is no longer male and female; for all of you are one in Christ
Jesus  (Galatians 3:27–28).56 Rather than emphasizing the significance of gender, the faithfulness of sexually
intimate couples can contribute to the Church’s witness to the new life God offers in Christ and through the
Spirit, which the Church celebrates in the “sacraments of the new creation. 57 For both same-sex and
different-sex couples, then, the theological and moral significance of their covenantal commitment is rooted
in the paschal mystery.
As in baptism and eucharist, the covenantal commitments of sexually intimate couples sweep their bodies
up into a grand and risky endeavor: to see if they can find their life in God by giving it to another. In these
covenants, two people vow to give themselves bodily and wholeheartedly to each other. They do this, in
part, to live out the promises of baptism while also living into the self-offering of Christ, as expressed at the
eucharistic table: “This is my body, given for you.  The lifelong commitment of covenanted couples can, by
God’s grace, testify to the love of God by signifying Christ and the Church. These commitments can thus
evoke for the wider community the very promise of the paschal mystery enacted in baptism and eucharist:
we are being drawn deeper into God’s own life where we learn that God’s love is stronger than death.
Sexually intimate couples can also testify to the love of neighbor by loving each other, a love that requires
both time and the sustenance of God’s grace. Covenantal couples can model this love, not as a static tableau
but as an ongoing school for virtue in which the practices of neighbor-love are developed, reformed, and
brought toward perfection. The moral significance of a covenantal relationship is its potential to bring each
of the covenant partners up against their embodied limits as finite creatures and to become willing to be
vulnerable to another. A covenantal commitment challenges and inspires each partner to self-offering as
each lives out with the other the relation of Christ and the Church (Ephesians 5:21–33). Members of a couple
urge each other forward in growth, which occurs through and with the creaturely limitations that Christ took
on for our good: the limits of time and the body. Our desires, including our sexual desires, “can be an
especially intense and unsettling reminder of our radical availability to the other. Like parental affection or
simple compassion, sexual desire can cause our heart to ‘belong’ to another. ... This desire shatters any

55

William Stacy Johnson notes, for example, that in ancient Mediterranean society, women were considered human beings but
decidedly deficient ones and were therefore rightly subservient to men (A Time to Embrace, 275, n.16). Dale B. Martin likewise relates
this ancient view of the inferiority of women—as “deficient men —to the difficulties in translating, let alone interpreting, two Greek
words in the New Testament that have been frequently cited regarding homosexuality. Those words appear in 1 Corinthians 6:9 and 1
Timothy 1:10. The words “sodomite  or “homosexual  have appeared in some English translations of those verses, but the meaning
of the Greek in both cases is obscure and elusive. Martin believes it likely that these words referred to cultural practices involving
sexual exploitation (perhaps including rape) and also effeminate behavior, which for men in that society triggered both alarm and
disgust (“Arsenokoitês and Malakos: Meanings and Consequences,  in Biblical Ethics and Homosexuality: Listening to Scripture, ed.
Robert L. Brawley [Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 1996], 117–36).
56
See Dale B. Martin, Sex and the Single Savior: Gender and Sexuality in Biblical Interpretation (Louisville: Westminster John Knox
Press, 2006), 77–90.
57
Among the many sources for this connection between the sacramental life of the Church and the divine promise of the new
creation, see Herbert McCabe, The New Creation (London: Continuum, 2010), where he refers to the Church’s sacraments as
“mysteries of human unity  insofar as we are, through the sacraments, being incorporated into the new creation God is bringing
about (xii).

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

35 of 158

illusions we may have regarding our ability to choose when and if we shall be connected to others; indeed, it
is itself a warrant for the claim that our fundamental relation to one another is one of connection. 58
Giving ourselves to another, as Christ gave himself for the world, takes time and the willingness to risk the
vulnerability inherent to the commitment of love. The movement of sexual desire toward intimacy and into
commitment begins as we give ourselves over to another in faithful relation and continues toward the final
moment of committal, surrendering our lives to God. This movement describes a lifelong, deliberate process
that, with obedience and faithfulness, produces visible holiness and the fruits of the Spirit. Both for the good
of the couple and for the good of the Church, God blesses this loving, intimate commitment. This blessing, in
turn, empowers the couple for their ministry in the world and energizes the Church for mission.

Mutual Blessing and Fruitfulness
As Christians, all of our relationships—as single people, in households, as intimate couples—are occasions to
live more fully into our Baptismal Covenant and participate more deeply in the paschal mystery of Christ’s
death and resurrection enacted at the eucharistic table. The commitment we exhibit in our relationships—to
love our neighbor as we love ourselves and as God loves each of us in Christ—thus becomes a source of
blessing for the whole Church.
This broad framework of covenantal relationship for the Church’s life offers a way to reflect on the
significance of the many types of covenants with which the Church is blessed—in ordination, monastic vows,
marriage, and also in same-sex relationships. The blessing of any relationship is a blessing not only for those
in a relationship but also and equally for the wider community in which the relationship is lived. This mutual
blessing is exhibited in many ways, not least by enabling those engaged in such relationships to manifest the
fruits of the Spirit (Galatians 5:22–23), which they might not have done apart from the relationship.
Discerning the gifts of the Spirit in a relationship is one reason a faith community blesses that relationship.
In addition, pronouncing a blessing can become an important occasion for deepening the process of
sanctification. Many couples desire this—and they need it. God can use the vulnerability of intimacy and the
giving of ourselves to another to expose our weaknesses, make us better, set us apart, and spur our moral
growth. The Church in turn can witness to the sanctifying work of the Spirit as God transforms the energy of
eros into the virtues of faith, hope, and love.
A blessing changes a couple as they become more aware of God’s grace and are commissioned by the
Church to bear witness to the paschal mystery. A blessing changes the Church as well: holiness of life is made
more manifest, so the community becomes accountable for supporting the couple as they grow into the
sanctifying work of the Spirit.
Entering into a covenant of faithfulness with another human being is one among many ways Christians live
out their baptismal calling in the world. As covenantal households are shaped by lives given over to service,
compassion, generosity, and hospitality, the grace encountered at the eucharistic table is further manifested
in the world. Thus, the fruitfulness of covenantal relationships and the blessings they offer to the Church
belong to the mission of the Church in its ongoing witness to the gospel of Jesus Christ and our hope of
union with God. This is the very source of our desire for communion with another.

58

Thomas Breidenthal, “Sanctifying Nearness,  in Theology and Sexuality: Classic and Contemporary Readings, ed. Eugene F. Rogers,
Jr. (Oxford: Blackwell, 2002), 345.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

36 of 158

4. The Church’s Challenge: Christian Unity and Biblical Interpretation
O God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, our only Savior, the Prince of Peace:
Give us grace seriously to lay to heart the great dangers we are in by our
unhappy divisions; take away all hatred and prejudice, and whatever else may
hinder us from godly union and concord; that, as there is but one Body and
one Spirit, one hope of our calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God
and Father of us all, so we may be all of one heart and of one soul, united in
one holy bond of truth and peace, of faith and charity, and may with one
mind and one mouth glorify thee; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
— “For the Unity of the Church,  BCP, 818

Christian unity with God and one another in Christ is a precious gift; likewise, our differences as believers are
gifts to be honored because these differences belong to God’s created order. Through these gifts we are
equipped for “building up the body of Christ, until all of us come to the unity of the faith and of the
knowledge of the Son of God  (Ephesians 4:12–13).
The Book of Common Prayer (1979) encourages Episcopalians to pray for Christian unity by recalling the
Pauline letter to the Ephesians. This letter reminds us that our bonds of affection are rooted not in our own
efforts but in God’s gracious gift in baptism. There is but one Body and one Lord. There is but one baptism,
by which we are joined—heart, soul, and mind—to one another (Ephesians 4:5). Most of all, as the prayer
quoted above reminds us, this baptismal unity serves the Christian call to praise and glorify God.
In baptism, God binds us to God’s own self by binding us to others who are different from us, linking our
salvation inextricably to the salvation of others. Furthermore, the divine gift of unity in no way relies on
uniformity. We are not united, one to the other, because we agree but because God has joined us together.59
The bond we share in baptism makes room for us to disagree with one another within the bonds of affection
we share as members of God’s own household of love and grace. We enact this unity by continuing “in the
apostles’ teaching and fellowship, in the breaking of bread, and in the prayers. 60 We cannot live into this
gift on our own, but with “sighs too deep for words,  the Spirit “helps us in our weakness  (Romans 8:26).
The Spirit slowly takes, offers, and transforms all the prayers of those who disagree with one another to
make them occasions to manifest the Body of Christ more visibly in the world and in the Church as well. In
this ongoing process of sanctification, we proclaim that we are marked as Christ’s own forever as members
of the Body of Christ.61 This foundational reality of our shared life sends us out to the world in witness to
Christ’s reconciling love.62
The challenges in making God’s gift of unity more and more visible appear, for example, within the New
Testament concerning the divisions in the Corinthian church (1 Corinthians 3:1–9), in Paul’s reminder to the
Romans that the body includes many diverse members (Romans 12:3–8), and perhaps most notably in Paul’s
baptism of non-Jews, which caused a debate with Peter over how to interpret their inherited Scriptures. Paul
recounts this disagreement in his letter to the Galatians (2:2–21). Peter’s vision (Acts 10:9–16) prior to
encountering Cornelius, a Roman centurion, and interacting with other Gentiles, moved him to declare that
no one should be called “profane or unclean  (Acts 10:28), and to urge his fellow apostles not to withhold
the water of baptism from those who had received the Holy Spirit just as they had (Acts 10:47). The inclusion
59

See Thomas E. Breidenthal, “Communion as Disagreement,  in Gays and the Future of Anglicanism: Responses to the Windsor
Report, ed. Andrew Linzey and Richard Kirker (Ropley, UK: O Books, 2005), 188–198.
60
“The Baptismal Covenant,  BCP, 304.
61
The centrality of baptism in our common life has been championed by a series of Anglican leaders, starting with Thomas Cranmer
and including F. D. Maurice and William Reed Huntington. As Paul Avis describes it, Anglican ecclesiology depends on the insistence
that “what unites us to Christ [that is, baptism] is all that is necessary to unite us, sacramentally, to each other  (The Identity of
Anglicanism: Essentials of Anglican Ecclesiology [London: T&T Clark, 2007], 111).
62
On baptismal ecclesiology, see Weil, A Theology of Worship, 22–28.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

37 of 158

of Gentiles who did not observe dietary laws within the household of the God of Israel overturned centuries
of biblical interpretation.
Throughout the Church’s history, Christians have endeavored to follow that apostolic practice of prayerful
deliberation in the light of Scripture and to discern the will of God—“what is good and acceptable and
perfect  (Romans 12:2)—in each new time and place. As the Body of Christ, our fundamental call is to live
together not only when we agree in our discernment but also when the Spirit leads faithful Christians to hold
more than one view. Different interpretations of Scripture are possible, provided they lead us to love God
and one another.63
General Convention Resolution 2009–C056 acknowledges differences of opinion within the Episcopal Church
concerning the interpretation of Scripture and same-sex relationships. This theological resource has
presented interpretations of some of the most difficult of these biblical passages to support the covenants
of same-sex couples while understanding that some members of the Episcopal Church continue to hear the
word of the Lord differently in these passages. All of us have more to learn from Scripture and from each
other. The Spirit baptizes us all in the name of Jesus, who is himself the Word of God and the Lord of
Scripture. In faithfulness to Christ, we acknowledge and respect those differences among us in our fervent
hope that disagreements over this biblical material need not divide the Church.64 Anglican Christians, along
with Christians in many other communions and historical eras, have discovered in ever new ways how the
grace of God in Christ offers a path toward unity even in the midst of profound disagreement.65
Our disagreements today belong in the context of the agreement we do enjoy concerning biblical
interpretation: the saving love and grace of God in Christ call us to be a holy people, living in faithfulness and
treating the human body as the temple of the Holy Spirit as we endeavor, with God’s help, to fulfill our
baptismal vows to “seek and serve Christ in all persons,  loving our neighbors as ourselves, to “strive for
justice and peace among all people,  and to “respect the dignity of every human being. 66 In such
agreement, the love with which we treat each other is to be modeled on the love of God for God’s people, as
well as on the life and ministry of Jesus himself.
Scripture offers little material that would address modern notions of sexual orientation, and biblical writers
devoted relatively little attention to questions of same-sex relations. Biblical scholars are divided regarding
the translation and interpretation of the texts most often cited on this question.67 Some maintain that these
texts unequivocally forbid same-sex relationships; others argue that these texts do not refer to same-sex
relationships as we understand them today and that each text must be interpreted within its own historical
and literary contexts.68
63

Augustine of Hippo believed that the command in Genesis to “increase and multiply  (1:22, 28) applied not only to the procreation
of children but also to the proliferation of textual meanings of Scripture. Augustine also believed that there were limits to multiple
interpretations: no interpretation of Scripture could be considered ethically Christian if it violated the commandment to love God and
one’s neighbor. See Dale B. Martin, Pedagogy of the Bible: An Analysis and Proposal (Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 2008),
59, 83–84.
64
Rowan Williams has noted, for example, that writers in our shared Anglican history have often turned to “a theologically informed
and spiritually sustained patience  as Anglican Christianity continues to grow and change. These writers, Williams says, “do not
expect human words to solve their problems rapidly, they do not expect the Bible to yield up its treasures overnight. ... They know
that as Christians they live among immensities of meaning, live in the wake of a divine action which defies summary explanation.
They take it for granted that the believer is always learning (Anglican Identities [Cambridge, MA: Cowley Publications, 2003], 7).
65
While the Church’s history is replete with many such examples, for illustrations from Anglican history, see William L. Sachs, The
Transformation of Anglicanism: From State Church to Global Communion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), esp. chap. 4,
“The Struggle to Define the Church and its Belief,  120–63.
66
“The Baptismal Covenant,  BCP, 305.
67
Those texts are Genesis 1–2, Genesis 19, Leviticus 18:22 and 20:13, Romans 1, 1 Corinthians 6:9, 1 Timothy 1:10, and Jude 7.
68
An overview of these positions appears in an issue of the Anglican Theological Review devoted to same-sex marriage; it offers “two
interpretations of doctrinal and scriptural faithfulness that fundamentally disagree  (Ellen T. Charry, “Preface,  Anglican Theological
Review 93:1 [Winter 2011]: xiv). The two major essays in this issue of the journal originated as a project commissioned in spring 2008
by the House of Bishops of the Episcopal Church, to be overseen by the Theology Committee of the House of Bishops.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

38 of 158

Similar disagreements over biblical interpretation have marked the Church’s life throughout its history.
Faithful Christians struggled for centuries to understand whether Scripture encouraged a view of vowed
religious life as a higher calling than marriage. Churches have disagreed over the biblical condemnation of
“usury,  which originally meant charging interest on loaned money, and whether it applies to contemporary
economic systems. Protestant reformers disagreed about biblical interpretations of the eucharist and even
whether particular biblical books ought to remain in the canon of Scripture. English reformers wrestled with
differing biblical views concerning liturgical vestments, Church music, the relationship between Church and
state, sacramental theology, and the role of ordained ministers.69
The Episcopal Church has struggled with how to interpret Scripture amid cultural change, whether
concerning economic reform, divorce and remarriage, or contraception.70 The practice of slavery and the
role of women are two areas in which major departures from the biblical text have been especially
controversial. Christians, including Episcopalians, in the nineteenth century used the Bible extensively to
justify the institution of slavery, particularly in the United States.71 In 1863, for example, Presiding Bishop
John Henry Hopkins of Vermont published a paper called “Bible View of Slavery,  which defended slavery as
“fully authorized both in the Old and New Testament,  defining it as “servitude for life, descending to the
offspring. 72
The struggle to ordain women in the Episcopal Church also involved deep conflicts over biblical
interpretation. Supporters of women’s ordination based their arguments on the gospel’s promise of
freedom and wholeness for all, while opponents believed that the maleness of the disciples named in the
New Testament established an unalterable tradition of male priesthood.73
The Episcopal Church eventually changed its positions regarding slavery and the ordination of women. The
diversity of approaches to Scripture in both cases made these decisions contentious. Serious questions
continue to be posed about how we understand the authority of Scripture, not only concerning slavery and
the status of women but also, now, same-sex relationships. All three of these issues have threatened to
divide the Church. No one today would justify the institution of slavery, but the worldwide Anglican
Communion continues to live with disagreement about ordaining women and blessing same-sex
relationships. With previous generations of the faithful who struggled in similar ways, our present
disagreements need not compromise our shared witness to the good news of God in Christ as we look
toward that day when our partial knowledge will be complete (1 Corinthians 13:12) and when God will be “all
in all  (1 Corinthians 15:28).
The hope we share for that day of final fulfillment in Christ does not thereby erase the challenge of living into
God’s gracious gift of unity today. For most Christians, this means noting carefully the limits of acceptable
differences; beyond those limits, the claim to Christian unity would prove difficult if not impossible. The
challenge, then, is not whether limits to our differences exist, but how to discern when we have crossed
those limits, and over what kinds of questions (whether doctrinal, moral, or liturgical, for example) we may
hold differing beliefs and still remain in communion.74 In the debate over same-sex relationships and biblical
69

For a history of the various ways the Church has read difficult biblical passages, see John L. Thompson, Reading the Bible with the
Dead: What You Can Learn from the History of Exegesis That You Can’t Learn from Exegesis Alone (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing
Company, 2007).
70
For an overview of challenges in biblical interpretation for a wide range of ethical concerns in the Episcopal Church, see Robert E.
Hood, Social Teachings in the Episcopal Church (Harrisburg: Morehouse Publishing, 1990).
71
Stephen R. Haynes, Noah’s Curse: The Biblical Justification of American Slavery (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002).
72
John Henry Hopkins, “Bible View of Slavery,  Papers from the Society for the Diffusion of Political Knowledge, no. 8 (1863): 132, 117;
see also John Henry Hopkins, A Scriptural, Ecclesiastical, and Historical View of Slavery, From the Days of the Patriarch Abraham, to the
Nineteenth Century (New York: W. I. Pooley and Co., 1864), 6.
73
Pamela W. Darling, New Wine: The Story of Women Transforming Leadership and Power in the Episcopal Church (Cambridge, MA:
Cowley Publications, 1994), 149.
74
For observations concerning matters that are essential to Christian life and those over which we may have legitimate differences
of opinion, see To Set Our Hope on Christ, 49–52.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

39 of 158

interpretation, Anglican Christians have disagreed about this process of discernment. Some Episcopalians
have concluded that blessing such relationships goes beyond the limits of acceptable difference, and, acting
on their conscience, they have parted company with the Episcopal Church, while others who disagree have
chosen to remain. Our Church will continue to live with varying approaches to Scripture on this question.
At a pivotal moment among early believers, recorded in Acts 15, the possibility of including Gentiles in the
Christian family sparked considerable controversy. The importance of this historical moment today lies not in
the first-century differences between Jews and Gentiles but in the process of prayerful deliberation those
early believers adopted. Facing the real possibility of irreparable division, the apostles sought a way to honor
the centrality of Scripture while also attending carefully to the ongoing movement of the Spirit in their
midst.
The Acts of the Apostles recounts that certain believers from the sect of the Pharisees were insisting that
men could not be saved unless they were circumcised and kept the law of Moses (Acts 15:5). As the apostles
and elders in Jerusalem considered this question, Peter (who had been persuaded by Paul’s point of view)
confirmed the work of the Holy Spirit among the Gentiles: “God, who knows the human heart, testified to
them by giving them the Holy Spirit, just as he did to us; and in cleansing their hearts by faith he has made no
distinction between them and us  (Acts 15:8–9). James considered this testimony and concluded that the
Spirit’s work urged a reconsideration of Scripture and an expansion of the gospel’s reach to include Gentiles
(Acts 15:13–21).
Acts 15 stands among other key biblical moments in which God’s people have found their vision broadened
to see a new thing God is bringing about (Isaiah 43:18–21), their assumptions challenged by the outpouring of
God’s Spirit where they had not expected it (Numbers 11:26–29; Joel 2:28), and the startling first fruits of
God’s new creation in raising Jesus Christ from the dead (1 Corinthians 15:20–25). These biblical turning
points, in themselves, will not settle today’s disagreements, yet they urge the same apostolic process of
prayerful deliberation: reliance on the centrality of Scripture while attending carefully to the Spirit’s work in
our midst.75
The Episcopal Church listened closely to the Spirit concerning slavery and the ordination of women. We are
summoned today to listen to the narratives of sanctification and holiness within the relationships of samesex couples and to discern and testify to the work of God in their lives. As we listen, we trust in that Spirit
who, as Jesus promised, will lead us further into truth (John 16:13), praying as Christ himself did for our unity
with each other in God (John 17:11) and blessing God for God’s abundant goodness in Christ so that, with
Paul, we may share more fully in the blessings of the gospel (1 Corinthians 9:23).

75

See Stephen E. Fowl, “How the Spirit Reads and How to Read the Spirit,  in Engaging Scripture: A Model for Theological
Interpretation (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 1998), 97–127; Jeffrey S. Siker, “How to Decide? Homosexual Christians, the Bible,
and Gentile Inclusion,  Theology Today 51:2 (July 1994): 219–34; and Rogers, Jesus, the Bible, and Homosexuality, 89–90.

LITURGICAL RESOURCES I

40 of 158

Responses to
“Faith, Hope, and Love 
The essays in this section represent the viewpoints of the individual authors rather than the consensus of the
Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music.

a. Thomas E. Breidenthal
Thomas E. Breidenthal is the Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Southern Ohio.

In “Faith, Hope, and Love: Theological Resources for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships,  the Standing
Commission on Liturgy and Music offers a thoughtful reflection on what the Church is saying and doing
when it blesses a same-sex union. The argument can be summarized as follows: (1) The Church blesses moral
practices that make for holiness; (2) holiness is conformation to the mission of God; (3) the mission of God is
reconciliation between God and us, and between us and one another; (4) this boils down to love of God and
love of neighbor; (5) faithful, monogamous same-sex unions are good incubators of this love; (6) therefore
in blessing these unions the Church sees and affirms a moral practice that makes for holiness. What we are
doing is invoking God’s favor to develop a couple’s capacity for love of God and neighbor and to empower
them for mission.
Commendably, the Standing Commission insists that blessed unions are not a private affair, but are
accountable to the Christian community as a whole. The essay notes that this is true for “different-sex 
couples as well, though they might “likewise find this to be a new way of thinking about their own marital
vows  (III.3). Also, it invites us to approach same-sex unions in the wider context of Christian householding,
thus reminding us that intentional communities (monastic and otherwise), as well as the single life, can form
us for God’s mission. That mission, defined as reconciliation, is firmly grounded both in the Trinity and in our
own need and capacity for community, “created in the Trinitarian image of God, an image that is inherently
relational  (III.3). That image is perfected in Jesus, in whom the self-giving and eternal love of the divine
persons is played out in Christ’s death and resurrection on our behalf. We are most in sync with God and with
our God-given nature when we give our life for another, and we understand the paschal mystery—what
Jesus’ death and resurrection accomplished—when we give our life to another and receive it back restored
and transformed. Finally, “Faith, Hope, and Love  makes clear connections between self-giving and the
Church’s two main sacraments. Baptism unites us with Christ in his death and resurrection, and the eucharist
sustains our union with him through a lifetime of schooling in love.
Still, this essay raises several concerns. Most importantly, the underlying argument is obscured and
sometimes contradicted by undue emphasis on the preexisting goodness of the unions that we bless. The
essay rightly seeks to ground Christian householding in the eucharistic pattern of the Christian life, but in so
doing seems at times to blur the distinction between this ground and the practices which it supports: “[The]
eucharistic pattern—often described with the actions take, bless, break, and give—shapes all the
relationships that we bring into our baptismal life with God. We take these relationships, bless God for their
goodness, ask God to bless them and break them open further to divine grace, so that we may give them to
the world as witnesses to the gospel of Jesus Christ  (III.3). This and other such statements are true taken
on their own, but in combination with the claim that blessed unions are set apart just as the eucharistic
bread is set apart, they convey a cumulative impression that these unions function primarily as vehicles of
grace for a needy world. I do not dispute that this is a hoped-for by-product of all Christian householding, but
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

41 of 158

I am not sure we should view it as its goal. As the essay itself says, the purpose of a covenanted relationship
is to help two people learn how to love each other as Christ loves us. For most of us sinners, this is
accomplishment enough, and it is for the grace to achieve such love for one person in one lifetime that
couples come seeking a blessing from the Church. This is not to say that a sustained commitment to love
another person completely does not mediate grace to onlookers. But it is a grace made perfect in weakness
(2 Cor. 12:9). It is as sinners that we enter into sacred unions, and it is only in expectation of God’s sanctifying
grace that we dare to call them sacred.
There is no doubt that the authors of “Faith, Hope, and Love  agree with this, since they speak of the grace
required to fulfill the purpose of a covenanted union: “The Church prays for the divine grace and favor the
couple will need to live into their commitment to each other with love, fidelity, and holiness of life  (III.1).
Yet, strikingly, help with temptation and sin is never included among the benefits of being blessed. Thus one
comes across sentences like this: “Members of a couple urge each other forward in growth, which occurs
through and with the creaturely limitations that Christ took on for our good: the limits of time and the body 
(III.3). What is left out here is the condition of fallen humanity that Christ did not take on, namely our
sinfulness. It is our sinfulness that makes us dangerous to one another, and renders every union risky. Surely
it is with this riskiness in mind that same-sex couples come seeking God’s aid and the Church’s support.
Although the Standing Commission’s essay acknowledges that dynamic, it clearly takes a backseat to a
different, problematic message: the Church’s blessing is first and foremost the recognition of goodness
already present. I understand that impulse. We want to right the balance and repent of our old derision—or
at best, our toleration—of faithful same-sex couples in our midst. It is also probably the case that since most
couples coming forward for a blessing have been together for a long time, the Church experiences its act of
blessing as long-overdue recognition and approval. Most of the couples that now come seeking a blessing
have a long history of faithful struggle together, and many have long been vehicles of grace to those around
them. But this season will soon be past, and we will see increasing numbers of gay and lesbian couples, many
of them young adults, who, like their heterosexual counterparts, really are just now making the move from
trial or experiment to mutual commitment. As that reality is borne in upon us, we will need to reemphasize a
major element of blessing that “Faith, Hope, and Love  downplays. In blessing any covenanted union, the
Church invokes God’s grace to bring to fruition a holy intention rendered fragile by inexperience and sin.
This leads me to a larger question about the Church’s approach to sexual morality in general. The Standing
Commission does not address this topic, nor was it asked to do so. Yet their discussion of same-sex blessings
begs that question, since, as I have already noted, they refer to blessed unions as being set apart: “The
blessing of the eucharistic table sets us apart as the Body of Christ in the world, called and empowered to
proclaim the gospel, just as the blessing of a covenantal relationship sets that relationship apart as ‘a sign of
Christ’s love to this sinful and broken world’  (III.2, with reference to BCP, 429). In so doing, the Commission
intends to stress that covenanted relationships are ordered to a specific vocation, namely, to draw others to
the saving work of Christ. I agree with that intention, but I do not think we should talk about these unions
being set apart. Such language suggests that lifelong unions are not necessarily the norm for sexual
partners, but a particular vocation taken on by a few. To be “set apart  implies being distinguished from a
group that is both normative and entirely acceptable. The obvious analogy is to clergy, who are set apart for
specific ministries within the Church. Here the laypersons comprise the normative group and clergy are the
exception. Yet, though our expectations of the two groups may differ somewhat, the same Baptismal
Covenant obligates both. A less obvious analogy, but one central to “Faith, Hope, and Love,  is to the bread
set apart for the eucharist. All bread is the good work of human hands, but we set some aside to become the
Body of Christ. In each case, out of something of positive value—the people of God and the bread of human
labor—a part is extracted for a particular purpose to serve the Church as a whole. “Faith, Hope, and Love 
suggests that as the eucharistic bread is set apart and blessed, so a covenanting couple that is blessed is set
apart. But set apart from whom? Clearly, from couples who have not committed to lifelong faithful
monogamy. It is not so clear how we are to regard this other, supposedly larger and normative group. If we
go with the relation of laity to clergy, or of ordinary to eucharistic bread, then we imply that there is nothing
amiss with couples who do not intend to be faithful and monogamous. They are like good Catholics in the
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

42 of 158

heyday of religious orders who chose marriage over celibacy. Do we intend to draw a similarly benign
contrast between sexually involved couples who intend lifelong monogamous fidelity and those who do not?
Have we abandoned the principle that sex should ordinarily go hand in hand with commitment to
permanence, however much we may fall short of that ideal? If that is the case, we should admit it. If it is not
the case, we need to say so.
Perhaps I am objecting to the language of this document because theological statements can and do
generate ancillary questions. Here’s one about the eucharist, which has a bearing on the discussion so far.
Why does “Faith, Hope, and Love  refer constantly to the blessing of bread and wine in the eucharist, and
not, as is more usual in our tradition, to their consecration? The essay repeatedly refers to the blessing of the
eucharistic bread and wine, and, quoting 1 Corinthians 10:16, to “the cup of blessing that we bless  (see III.2
and III.3). It goes on to point out that the Great Thanksgiving is deeply rooted in the Jewish understanding of
blessing. To bless something is to bless God who made it, and in so doing to reveal its essential goodness as
coming from God’s hands. All this is true, and its bearing on what it means to bless anything is obvious. But
to restrict the eucharistic action to blessing diminishes it. We do not merely set the elements of bread and
wine apart for a sacred purpose. Having thanked God, we invoke the Holy Spirit to make Christ present to us
in them. “The cup of blessing that we bless, is it not  (to complete Paul’s phrase) “a communion in the blood
of Christ?  By the Spirit the elements are changed; they become Christ for us. By the same Spirit we are
made Christ’s body—the exodus body into which we are incorporated in baptism. There is a reason why the
Book of Common Prayer refers to this transformation as consecration, not blessing (BCP, 408). To bless is,
indeed, to acknowledge something good and to commend it to God’s use. By contrast, to consecrate is to
set something apart in the expectation that something essential about it will be changed. We believe that
the elements of bread and wine become the body and the blood of Christ. As Anglicans, we refrain from
explicating that change further (transubstantiation? consubstantiation? real presence?), but we do insist on
the change. This is why the eucharistic action is not only anamnesis (a recalling of what God has done for us),
but requires epiclesis, going beyond the Jewish prayer of blessing to ask the Father to send the Holy Spirit
upon the bread and wine that they may become Christ for us.
I draw attention to this distinction between blessing and consecration, not only because it has a bearing on
our understanding of the eucharist, but because it has a bearing on our understanding of the Church’s
blessing of sexual unions. We reserve the term “consecration  for change which effects union with Christ,
whether of the eucharistic elements or the gathered Church, or, secondarily, as a synonym for ordination,
understood as a setting apart to represent the Church as the Body of Christ. It is in union with Christ that the
Church blesses. Christ’s “This is my body  at the last supper, which anticipates his self-offering on the cross,
also goes beyond the Jewish blessing. In addition to blessing his Father, and so acknowledging the bread
and wine as coming from his hand, Jesus gives himself to us. In so doing he bestows life, healing, power,
protection, comfort, and direction on us. This bestowal is the fullness of what Christians mean by a blessing.
Christ’s offering of himself cannot be understood apart from its Jewish ground—gratitude to God for gifts
received in right relation to God—but it goes beyond this ground to stand in identification with God as God’s
Word, both to bestow the gifts of the Spirit and to cooperate with the Spirit in its work.
So blessing is, first and foremost, Christ’s blessing. This is a blessing poured out on sinners from the cross. It
is only in the acknowledgment of our sin that we can receive this blessing thankfully. But when we do
receive it thankfully, we enter into communion with Christ, because we own his death for us and, in thankful
response, are moved to spend the rest of our lives dying to sin. This is why Paul says that the cup of blessing
is a communion in the blood of Christ. Our thanksgiving—that is, our blessing of God—comes at the price of
repentance and loss. It is when our thanksgiving passes through that narrow door that our offering is
accepted and returned to us as holy, bringing us into the presence of our risen Savior and transforming us
into his Body. Here, and only here, can we speak properly of the Church as offering its own or God’s blessing
to anyone. The Church blesses as the Body of Christ, but does so as a Body redeemed from sin—a joyful
Body, to be sure, but a chastened and humbled Body, too. We are always sinners blessing sinners.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

43 of 158

This sensibility is discernible at various points in “Faith, Hope, and Love,  but its various elements never quite
coalesce. Once again, my hunch is that its authors were avoiding any suggestion that people in same-sex
unions struggle with sin, lest they expose such unions once again to being singled out as especially sinful. I
acknowledge the charity at play here. But in the long run we gain ground only if, for same-sex or
heterosexual unions, a clear line is drawn from sin to repentance, from repentance to grace, from grace to
thanksgiving.

b. John E. Goldingay
John E. Goldingay is the David Allan Hubbard Professor of Old Testament at Fuller Theological Seminary
in Pasadena, California, and priest-in-charge of St. Barnabas Church, Pasadena.

When I lived in England, I knew quite well two women who had lived together for most of their adult lives. I
have reason to think it was a celibate relationship, but I have no basis for knowing whether they felt any
sexual attraction. I can imagine them giving each other a kiss or a hug before they went to bed each night in
their separate bedrooms. I might call their relationship quasi-covenantal; in their latter years, one of them
had a stroke, and the other looked after her and continued to make it possible for them to share a church
involvement and to take holidays together. The one on whom fell the major responsibility for caring once
commented wryly on the similarity of her situation and mine, because I had a similar responsibility for my
disabled wife.
It has been instructive for me to reflect on the “faith, hope, and love  expressed in that relationship, and I
could be glad to pray for God’s blessing on it—indeed, I probably did so. I am sad that it is harder nowadays
for such relationships to happen and to flourish without their being imagined to be something else.
Most of the essay on “Faith, Hope, and Love  comprises helpful reminders on the Church’s mission, on
blessing, on covenant, and on unity. But how far do these reminders apply to the blessing of same-sex
relationships (with the connotations this phrase has in our culture)? The essay refers to the earlier study
commissioned by the House of Bishops, which issued in a report outlining a “liberal  and a “traditionalist 
position regarding same-sex relationships. I was a member of the traditionalist group within the task force
that produced the study. “Faith, Hope, and Love  goes with the liberal position, as it must if it is to provide
support for the development of resources for the blessings of same-sex relationships. My comments here,
therefore, largely restate aspects of the traditionalist position.
First, the biblical arguments. To begin with, let us agree that Genesis 18–19 is irrelevant in light of the fact
that no one is arguing for the kind of sexual relationships described there. On the other hand, one might
note that Scripture does speak of same-sex relationships, such as those between Naomi and Ruth and
between David and Jonathan, that offer models for thinking about relationships like that between my two
friends. (It has of course been speculated that the two biblical relationships were same-sex relationships in
our sense, but the stories offer no pointer to that possibility—and the Old Testament does not shy away
from referring to sex when it is a significant aspect of a narrative; further, it is unlikely that the books
describing these relationships would have envisaged that possibility, or that the books would have found
acceptance into the canon of Scripture on that hypothesis.)
The arguments that Genesis 1–2 need not imply a validation of heterosexual relationships alone are not
convincing. Genesis 1 talks about male and female in connection with the fulfillment of God s purpose in
creation and the fruitfulness of humankind. Humanity’s blessing and proliferation though heterosexual
relationships is implied in the creation of male and female. The traditionalist document quotes Anglican
biblical scholar Gordon Wenham, writing on Genesis: “Here then we have a clear statement of the divine
purpose of marriage: positively, it is for the procreation of children; negatively, it is a rejection of the ancient

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

44 of 158

oriental fertility cults. 1 Genesis 2:24 is explicitly about heterosexual marriage: “Therefore a man leaves his
father and his mother and clings to his wife, and they become one flesh.  While “one flesh  may suggest
more than their sexual relationship, it hardly means less. Further, one reason why it is not good for the man
to be alone is that he cannot generate children. He needs help if he is to do so. Procreation is integral to
marriage’s purpose, and is the reason why marriage involves a man and a woman. So the centerpiece in the
vision of human marriage in Genesis is not intimacy, relationship, or romance, but family. The man and the
woman will be the means and context in which the family will grow so as to serve God and the land. This
point in itself does not exclude same-sex marriages, but it does not point to their being an equally valid
option.
In Romans 1, sexual relationships between people of the same sex are an expression of human waywardness
and of the rejection of the truth, and a result of God’s wrath operating in the world. It is important to note
that Paul sees such relationships as a result of God’s wrath operating against sin in the world, not a cause of
that wrath. Heterosexual people are as much implicated in this waywardness (not least in our sexual
relationships) as people involved in same-sex relationships, which is reason for us to identify with our
brothers and sisters involved in same-sex relationships, not to repudiate or shame them.
First Corinthians 6:9–11 and 1 Timothy 1:10 offer lists of people who will not inherit the kingdom of God, lists
that include people involved in homosexual behavior and people who are greedy, rebellious, and guilty of
certain other sins. The lists do not look as if they are intended to be comprehensive and do not imply that a
distinctive shame attaches to that particular sin. Both passages use the term arsenokoitai, which denotes
men who lie with another man as with a woman. It echoes the proscription in Leviticus, and thus suggests
that the New Testament understands Leviticus to be proscribing a practice that was more than a matter of
purity and impurity. First Corinthians 6:9 also use the word malakoi, a term in Hellenistic Greek for someone
who is the passive partner in a same-sex relationship. The use of both terms undermines the argument that
these passages are especially concerned with pederasty.
On the basis of its study of such passages, the traditionalist argument in the report to the House of Bishops
concluded, “The one-flesh pattern of heterosexual marriage in Genesis was the background for the
descriptions of sinful behavior in the letters to Timothy, to the Corinthians, and to the Romans. Because
homosexual behavior was more common in the Greco-Roman world, there was a need to update and
expand the list of actions contrary to the Decalogue by including homosexual behavior along with theft,
adultery, and so on. 2 It would be more realistic to infer that the Scriptures’ perspective on this subject is
limited than to infer that our culture enables us to clarify its meaning as being open to affirming same-sex
relationships.
Second, the question of mission and context. In the world as it was designed “from the beginning, 
marriage involved the lifelong commitment of one man and one woman as the context for raising a family.
At least four forms of relationship come one point short of that vision: polygamy; marriage that avoids
having children; marriage in which one person has a still-living divorced partner; and same-sex relationships.
To express the matter thus is not to imply that all of these four forms of relationship have the same
theological or ethical status, but I find it helpful to see that there is a partial analogy between them. Within
my own extended family and circle of friends are marriages that involve a partner whose former spouse is
still living, a marriage where the couple has avoided having children, people who are in same-sex
relationships, and someone who comes from a polygamous marriage. I would like to be able to seek God’s
blessing on such marriages and relationships, but I am unclear in what sense I can do so, as I could for the
couple I described at the beginning of this response to the essay.

1
Quoted in John E. Goldingay, Grant R. LeMarquand, George R. Sumner, and Daniel A. Westberg, “Same-Sex Marriage and Anglican
Theology: A View from the Traditionalists,  Anglican Theological Review 93:1 (Winter 2011): 24–25.
2
“A View from the Traditionalists,  27.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

45 of 158

Two of those four forms of union appear in Scripture; two do not. I find it helpful to look at the two that do
not appear in light of the way Scripture speaks of the two that do.
Jesus explicitly discusses divorce, and provides the helpful insight into the Torah that the Torah deals with
both the ideal world (how things were from the beginning) and how things are in the world we know, where
human hardness of heart is a reality. Deuteronomy’s acceptance of divorce belongs in the latter category.
Jesus does not bring a new standard of his own to the question, but affirms the visionary standard within
the Torah. Elsewhere, he describes the entirety of the Torah and the Prophets as an outworking of love for
God and love for one’s neighbor, and one can see how this description applies to the Deuteronomic rule that
presupposes divorce. Marriages do break down, and in a traditional society women may then be in an
especially vulnerable position. The rule about giving a woman divorce papers is an expression of love that
offers them some protection.
The Torah and the Prophets also acknowledge the practice of polygamy. They implicitly recognize problems
polygamy can solve; they certainly portray problems it can generate. They do not explicitly say that it stands
in tension with the creation vision for marriage, but this inference seems plausible. I can imagine Jesus taking
a similar view of polygamy to the one he takes of divorce.
The Bible does not refer to the committed, covenantal same-sex relationships that are presupposed by our
discussion of blessing such relationships, but I take them to have a similar status. They, too, do not
correspond to the creation ideal but reflect the reality of human hardness of heart. Paul’s comments in
Romans encourage us to think not so much in terms of the individual hardness of heart of the people
involved in these relationships, but of the hard-heartedness of humanity as a whole.
Considering these four issues together also helps us take into account the sociological and cultural factors
involved in our thinking about these relationships, to which the essay refers in the section on mission. On the
one hand, fifty years ago divorce was much less common than is now the case, and the Church did not marry
divorced people. (As a newly-ordained priest in England, I recall initiating the arrangement for a couple’s
wedding before it transpired that the divorced man was describing himself as a bachelor on the basis that he
was no longer married.) Twenty-five years ago, I blessed the marriage of a woman and a man who had been
divorced; in England, I could not have done so in a church, but I could in our seminary chapel (the woman is
now an archdeacon). In the twenty-first century, one of my own bishops has commented that she is hesitant
about approving a marriage for someone who has been twice-divorced, but she sometimes does so. A big
change in attitude and practice to divorce in the Church has come about not because we have studied
Scripture and the Church’s tradition more, but because of sociological and cultural factors. There are positive
and negative aspects to this development.
With regard to same-sex relationships, there are parallel sociological and cultural considerations. One is the
general sexualization of U.S. culture. Another is the collapse of the old family structures of which unattached
people could be a part (the study’s material on household is helpful in this connection). Related is the
general assumption that people will be involved in sexual activity, and the apparent quaintness of the idea
that it should not be so. Another is the ease with which people of same-sex attraction can engage in sexual
activity without thereby earning public disapproval. Another is the increasing legal recognition of same-sex
partnerships or marriage in Western countries. A further aspect of the cultural shift is the assumption that
marrying someone of the same sex is simply a matter of proper freedom and choice. There is no moral
difference between the two forms of relationship. That view also seems obvious to many Christians, who
then add that neither is any theological difference involved.
Yet while same-sex relationships thus seem as “natural  to some people as heterosexual relationships seem,
the jury is still out on the scientific questions on same-sex relationships, as is noted in the study of “Biological
Mechanisms in Homosexuality: A Critical Review  in The Anglican Communion and Homosexuality.3 The
3

David de Pomerai, “Biological Mechanisms in Homosexuality: A Critical Review  in Philip Groves, ed., The Anglican Communion and
Homosexuality: A Resource to Enable Listening and Dialogue (London: SPCK, 2008), 268–292.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

46 of 158

essay’s section on mission notes these cultural circumstances in which we take part in God’s mission, and in
particular the “shift in cultural perspectives  on sexuality. It can be read as implying that we must go along
with the cultural shift. Yet there surely can be cultural shifts that we do not go along with. The fact that
there is a cultural shift is a fact that we need to take into account, but our mission might be to confront it,
not baptize it. One way we might be able to get some perspective on cultural shifts and on our relationship
to them is by looking at ourselves from the perspective of people in other cultures, and particularly other
churches. We might note the analogy between the way many Western people are appalled by polygamy,
while many people in traditional societies are appalled by same-sex relationships or serial monogamy. It is
particularly unfortunate that we as a Church do not seek to look at ourselves from other perspectives in this
way and can seem simply to assume that we are the enlightened.
Nor does acceptance of same-sex relationships parallel the abolition of slavery, the proscribing of racism, the
elimination of woman’s subordination, or the acceptance of women’s ordination. In each of these areas,
there is material in Scripture that explicitly expresses what I have called God’s vision as well as material that
makes allowance for human hardness of heart. There is nothing in Scripture that expresses a vision for samesex relationships.
I close with a further adaptation of words from the traditionalist submission to the House of Bishops. The
lack of clarity concerning same-sex attraction on the part of biological and social scientists, the wounds in
much of the rest of the Anglican Communion caused by our unilateral action, and the apparent implications
of Scripture and the Church’s tradition all make it hard to see how the essay’s useful material on blessing can
be applied to same-sex relationships.
I appreciate the fact that the essay itself closes with a challenge concerning Christian unity and biblical
interpretation. I know priests who are afraid that the time will come when a bishop will withhold a license
from them if they are not prepared to bless same-sex relationships or (in due course) to conduct same-sex
marriages. It will be nice if the essay’s closing challenge will mean that people who do not accept the
Church’s new stance on same-sex relationships will not be excluded from its ministry.

c. Deirdre Good
Deirdre Good is professor of New Testament at The General Theological Seminary in New York City.

I thank the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music for their important reflections on the theological
resources of the Episcopal Church for same-sex relationships. My invited response simply indicates that I
have been, since my marriage to Julian Sheffield in 2008, in a different place. This description of our samesex marriage service is offered as a contribution to the discussion, as our Church moves toward what I hope
will be the recognition and use of a single marriage service for same-sex and different-sex couples.
When we planned our wedding in 2008, it proved strikingly easy to modify a few single words in the Book of
Common Prayer’s Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage so that two persons of the same sex could
administer the sacrament to each other with integrity. Why this was the case is something that bears
reflection.
First, the words.
The Book of Common Prayer has the celebrant declare at the outset, “Dearly beloved: We have come
together in the presence of God to witness and bless the joining together of this man and this woman in Holy
Matrimony.  Our wedding service substituted: “Dearly beloved: We have come together in the presence of
God to witness and bless the joining together of these women in Holy Matrimony. 
The Declaration of Consent is repeated without a change in language: “N., will you have this woman to be
your wife ... ? 
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

47 of 158

In the Ministry of the Word, the opening lines of the prayer change from “O gracious and everliving God, you
have created us male and female in your image: Look mercifully upon this man and this woman who come to
you seeking your blessing,  to “O gracious and everliving God, you have created us in your image: Look
mercifully upon these women who come to you seeking your blessing.  These changes render without
distortion the idea that humanity is created in God’s image and likeness (Genesis 1:26–27).
Following the vows, instead of the celebrant saying the words, “I now pronounce that they are husband and
wife,  our priest presiding said, “I now pronounce you married.  In our case, in a state that legalized samesex marriage, this recognized our relationship in both legal and religious spheres.
Second: the possible reasons.
Marriage realizes an order in creation. Here we join with those who state that Christianity is a “deeply
material religion,  regarding the “knowledge of God as mediated through ... creation. 4 The presence of God
in the world is made accessible in the central doctrine of the Incarnation by means of which God is known
not simply through experience of the physical world but one in which God becomes part of creation, being
born as a human being. Thus God can be known as a person directly. Christianity elevates the dignity of the
human person now made to be a participant with God in the safeguarding of the cosmos and in recognition
of finitude. As to the creation of humanity and the institution of marriage, we disagree that experience of
male/female sexual relations best interprets that order; we think instead that the order of creation is best
known within the sanctifying relation of Christ and the Church as ekklesia or community (Tyndale:
congregation). This is to say that we think the diversity of creation is realized and perfected in the
community of Christ. Thus our minimalist modification of the BCP’s Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage
deemphasizes the male–female or “complementarian  element of the marriage typology while stressing and
amplifying the unitive and egalitarian dimension of the Christological analogy or “mystery.  This functions to
enhance what we have come to recognize and understand as the implicit unitive elements of the service.
We believe marriage is a discipline. The discipline of marriage relies on the difficulty of living with another “in
prosperity and adversity  (BCP, 423), not to avoid our faults, but precisely to expose them—so that they can
be healed. Nor does the clause “when they hurt each other  included in the prayers (BCP, 429) confine itself
to minor slights. Since hurt and acknowledgment—sin and confession—are central to Christian growth and
the sacraments, this prayer sets their discipline in the theater of the whole fallen world. What matters in a
marriage is not whether the ministers of that marriage to each other are same- or differently-sexed; what
matters is that they were separate and they become united. The existing Prayer Book rite does an
extraordinarily good job of expressing that uniting for couples of whatever sexual orientation, setting them
on the path that will “make their life together a sign of Christ’s love to this sinful and broken world, that
unity may overcome estrangement, forgiveness heal guilt, and joy conquer despair  (BCP, 429).

d. Dora Rudo Mbuwayesango
Dora Rudo Mbuwayesango is the Iris and George E. Battle
Professor of Old Testament at Hood Theological Seminary in Salisbury, North Carolina.

I commend the members of the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music for their dedication and good
work in producing for the Church this much-needed resource for the blessing of same-sex relationships.
Lesbians and gays have always been accepted by God as part of God’s good creation and part of God’s
redeemed people, and I am glad that the Episcopal Church is now ready to recognize a dawning of the
kingdom of God in our time. The essay lays out well why we should have a liturgy for blessing same-sex

4

Edward Norman, An Anglican Catechism (New York: Continuum, 2001), 15.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

48 of 158

relationships. The following is my humble contribution to the furthering of the conversation that General
Convention requested of the Standing Commission.

III.1. The Church’s Call: A Focus on Mission
The place of blessings in the mission of the Church is well put: “The public affirmation of the blessing of a
covenantal relationship also sets that relationship apart for a sacred purpose: to bear witness to the
creating, redeeming, and sustaining love of God.  As “Faith, Hope, and Love  affirms in its preface,
“Everything we do as Christians is meant to express the Church’s call to participate in God’s own mission in
the world.  The missional character of blessing lies in the truth that one is blessed in order to serve.
While it is true that this missional understanding of blessing is located in Scripture, the passages given from
the Hebrew Bible do not seem to reflect that point. The witness from the book of Genesis seen in Abraham
(12:2b) and Jacob (28:14b) would need to be read through Galatians 3:8, where Paul interprets it to include
the extension of blessings to the Gentiles. In the context of Genesis there are two ways to understand these
verses. In the first place those other nations’ blessings was dependent on their treatment of either Abraham
or Jacob. Secondly, Abraham’s blessing extends beyond the individual in the sense of its extension to his
direct descendants (Gen. 15:12–21; 17:1–8). But passages like Micah 4:1–4 and Isaiah 2:2–4 better demonstrate
this missional understanding of blessing: God’s grace in elevating Jerusalem/Zion will result in the revelation
of God and in greater service to the other nations in the establishment of justice and peace among and
within the nations.
Worship and Mission: An Eschatological Vision. Worship equips for mission in the realization of the just reign
of God. Rites of blessing by the Church, of which the blessing of covenantal relationships is a part, equip
couples with the grace necessary to “make their life together a sign of Christ’s love to this sinful and broken
world, that unity may overcome estrangement, forgiveness heal guilt, and joy conquer despair  (BCP 429).
The Church’s vocation is in bringing up the just reign of God. And the just reign of God does not participate in
the unjust marginalization of segments of persons who are part of God’s creation.
Same-Sex Relationships and the Church’s Mission. It is a pity that the Church, in many ways, has been
challenged by culture instead of challenging culture in recognizing the humanity of lesbian and gay persons.
In fact, Christians have often stood, and in many ways continue to stand, in the way of granting human and
civil rights to this important segment of humanity. But I am glad that the Episcopal Church is finally striving
to do what the Spirit is leading it to do in affirming same-sex relationships. The many ways that same-sex
relationships contribute to the mission of the Church are well presented in this section. But I would like to
point to one aspect that has significance on the use of the marriage metaphor for the divine–human
relationship. This metaphorical depiction of the divine–human relationship in the biblical texts (particularly in
the prophets Hosea, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel) is characterized by an association of divine love, compassion,
commitment, and reconciliation with divine wrath and punishment in the form of the rape and mutilation of
women. Patriarchy’s gender hierarchy and androcentric bias privileged male sexuality in a way that distorted
human sexuality in general. And when that metaphor is used to depict the divine–human bond, the image of
that bond is also distorted. Same-sex relationships have the potential to model mutuality in sexual
relationships, which, in turn, redeems the metaphor of sexual bond for the divine–human covenant
relationship: the Church can then celebrate and live up to its identity as the Bride of Christ.
The Challenge of God’s Blessings for Mission. A large part of Christ’s mission was to expand the horizon of the
kingdom of God. The suffering, death, and resurrection of Christ broke geographical and temporal
boundaries. During his ministry, Jesus did not limit himself to those who thought they belonged, but made it
a point to reach out to those whom others thought did not belong, and he was criticized for it. Jesus went
beyond the earlier, limited attempts to expand the horizons: “To the eunuchs who keep my sabbaths, who
choose the things that please me and hold fast my covenant, I will give ... an everlasting name that shall not
be cut off. And the foreigners who join themselves to the LORD, to minister to him, to love the name of the
LORD, and to be his servants ... —these I will bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of
prayer; their burnt offerings and their sacrifices will be accepted on my altar; for my house shall be called a
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

49 of 158

house of prayer for all peoples  (Isaiah 56:4–7). Unlike the prophet Isaiah, who advocated for those ready on
their own to come, Jesus went out seeking them. Acts 10 shows us how the lessons from the past and the
model of Jesus does not make us immune to this shortcoming. But as history as shown us in the
development of the Church’s traditions, we need the Holy Spirit to continue to nudge us in the right
direction every time God reveals a segment of society overlooked and excluded from experiencing the
abundance of God’s grace in the kingdom of God.

III.2. The Church’s Joy: A Theology of Blessing
Same-sex blessings are now part of communal worship—they are outward and visible signs of God’s grace. I
would like to underscore the fact that “the grace and blessing of God already discerned in a couple’s
relationship does not thereby render a liturgical rite of blessing redundant.  As in the context of holiness
depicted in the Torah, God makes holy and the community enact holiness. In the case of holiness, humans do
rituals to enact the holiness established by God. So God and people mutually construct holiness—God
declares and people enact it through rites.
The extension of the blessing to all nations becomes much more evident in Christ. The references in the Old
Testament are problematic especially in Genesis 12:3 and much more limited in Isaiah 56 (see my comment
above). Paul’s interpretation of Genesis 12:3 makes the ultimate inclusion of all people that is evident in
Jesus’ ministry and that of the early Church.
Indeed, “baptism and eucharist focus our attention on the particular blessings of the paschal mystery of
Christ’s death and resurrection.  And these blessings then “encourage us to discern the many other ways
God’s blessing is manifested in both creation and covenant.  We do not want to be blind to the potential
vehicles for blessings, especially the love and faithfulness of covenantal relationship. As one-sided, abusive,
and corrupt as marriage often was in ancient Israel, its focus on faithfulness nonetheless made it a suitable
metaphor for the divine–human covenant. In the Old Testament, the wife was considered the property of
the husband and thus the wife’s faithfulness to her husband was absolute, while the same was not required
of the husband. Faithfulness in love is what makes sexual bonds a vehicle for blessings.
I think one of the elements of God’s blessings that bears emphasis is the abundance of God’s blessing and
grace. I am glad that this is very much emphasized in the essay. I think not realizing that abundance was one
of the shortcomings of the religious leaders in Jesus’ day and continues to be manifested in our day. Jesus
demonstrated the abundance of God’s blessings in his teachings and actions. In some ways Jesus himself
seems to have struggled with that reality, and it may have taken the Canaanite woman’s challenge—“Yes,
Lord, yet even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their masters’ table  (Matt. 15:27)—for Jesus to
acknowledge the abundance of God’s blessings.

III.3. The Church’s Life: Covenantal Relationship
Creation, Baptism, and Eucharist. The prophets do use marriage as a metaphor for the bond between God
and the people of Israel, but we should take note that most of those uses are tied to judgment. We should
also take into consideration the patriarchal nature of marriage that put women in a disadvantaged and
subordinate position to men, which is indicated in Ephesians 5:21–33. I believe that same-sex relationships
help us to clearly see and demonstrate mutuality in committed sexual relationships because acts of love are
not gendered and hierarchal.
Loving Our Neighbor as Ourselves. It is very important and insightful to recognize the concept of hospitality
that governed the accounts in Genesis 19 and Judges 19, which is the focus of these stories. Also, the stories
are about the gang rape of a male individual and not mutual sexual relationships between consenting
individuals. The gang rape of women is not acceptable since Lot’s daughters are divinely protected and the
rape of the Levite’s wife in Judges leads to civil war. Patriarchy and hetero-normativity govern how sexuality
is depicted in these narratives and in the biblical narratives as a whole. Hospitality should not be extended
only to some parts of humanity but to all humanity, whether female or male, heterosexual or homosexual,

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

50 of 158

bisexual or transgender. The model of hospitality in these narratives should be critiqued as inadequate.
Hospitality extended to all will result in the safety of all.
Called into Covenant. Covenants are lived in community and as Christians the Church is our community, and
thus bears witness to individual and communal covenants. The Church then “rightly celebrates these
moments of covenantal vocation  and calls us to live in households shaped by “deepening faithful intimacy. 
The Vocation of Households. I am appreciative of the attempt to tackle biblical passages that are obscure and
yet have been used to support heterosexuality, in opposition to same-sex sexuality. I would like to add that
the Bible’s construct of sexuality is limited by a concern for procreation and thus ignores all other sexual
expressions, whether they are heterosexual or non-heterosexual. In other words, what we have in the Bible
is not a definition of sexuality but procreation sexuality, and that makes it a very narrow and limited view of
sexuality.
Faithful Intimacy. We need to acknowledge the problems that are found in the biblical use of sexual intimacy
to reflect God’s relationship with humanity. In the Hebrew Bible, in particular, the metaphor is mostly used
by the prophets to depict Israel’s unfaithfulness and God’s judgment and punishment. God’s desire and love
are intricately tied to the “justified  abuse of the unfaithful wife. The sexual bond has to be untangled from
its connection to sexual abuse before it should be readily accepted as a positive metaphor for God’s love and
desire for God’s people. In the same way, the limitation of Genesis 1 and 2 have to be acknowledged when
these are taken as defining sexuality. The broad framework of Genesis 1 and 2 has to be accepted, and when
we see only the individuals in these texts we may be missing the point. Paul himself may be very wrong in
seeing individuals as being in the image of God. I would suggest that humanity as a whole is in the image of
God, and whatever our individual genders or sexualities, all of us together make the image of God. And
together we are fruitful.

III.4. The Church’s Challenge: Christian Unity and Biblical Interpretation
When we recite the Nicene Creed and the Apostles’ Creed in our liturgies we acknowledge the universal
Church. There are many elements of the human experience that make us disagree in certain areas of faith,
and while unity as a Church is of great value we should not hold on to that unity when it hinders the
eschatological vision. The love of Christ compels us to seek justice for all humanity as we follow the model of
Christ to love. I think the fact that the Gospel of John depicts Jesus praying for the unity of his disciples (John
17:20–24) reflects the difficulty of forging and maintaining that unity in an imperfect world. As we strive for
that unity, we should not lose focus on God’s mission and our mission in the world.

Concluding Wish
It is my hope that subsequent editions of the rites for the blessing of same-sex relationships will not seem to
reflect that they are inferior to different-sex relationships. I also hope that our limited understanding of the
blessedness of same-sex relationships will deepen and expand, and will no longer be as dependent on our
understanding of different-sex or heterosexual marriage.

e. George R. Sumner
George R. Sumner was the Principal at Wycliffe College in Toronto.
On May 16, 2015, he was elected Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Dallas.

I have been requested to respond to the document called “Faith, Hope, and Love: Theological Resources for
Blessing Same-Sex Relationships.  This is actually not the first time I have been asked by the Episcopal
Church to weigh in on this subject. I was a traditionalist member of the House of Bishops’ Theology
Committee, which met over two years and at considerable expense to the Church, beginning in 2008. Our
group was a congenial and generous-spirited one, and we presented both sides of the theology of marriage
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

51 of 158

in relation to same-sex relations, along with rebuttals of the opposing team’s claims. Our work was
presented to the House of Bishops, and eventually published in the Anglican Theological Review in the Winter
2011 issue. Our document did not receive any mention in the introduction to “Faith, Hope, and Love,  though
it is cited in a footnote in the last section, on Christian unity. Apparently the Church has moved beyond the
point where two points of view need to be represented in official reflection on this issue. I will not attempt
to summarize all our points in this short piece, since anyone interested can find the complete essays at the
Anglican Theological Review website. As for the more recent document, it is an articulate presentation of the
progressive position, but does not break any new ground. It will reinforce the views of those who agree, but
offers little of interest for those who do not.
As to the prior committee of which I was a part, after two years of work, it was clear to most of us that the
matter came down to culture. The revisionist case cannot be made from the Bible, tradition, or science, and
there were moments of candor on this score from the progressive side. Is the new trend a wind of the Spirit,
or not? Can the stool in question stand on that one leg? I am by trade a missiologist, and so it was interesting
for me to note how the tag missio Dei was deployed to bolster the progressive argument. It was claimed that
what God is now doing in the world trumped all other evidence. But some historical study around the
concept of the missio tag reveals the tendency we humans have to conflate the trajectory of God’s work in
the world with our own political predilections, when our perception is unaided by Scripture and tradition.
As to the politics of the moment, conservative Episcopalians are in an awkward position. Even as these
resources for same-sex blessing rites are being appropriated by the Church, consideration of marriage itself
has begun. There is a strong suggestion that a proposed change to the rite of marriage cannot be far behind.
I believe that the move to bless same-sex unions was a mistake, but I also believe that proceeding on to
marriage, and ensconcing the change in the Book of Common Prayer, would exacerbate the problem. That
move would enflame the conflict further, especially in the Anglican Communion. It would threaten to move
the new liturgical practice from option to coercion. It would put at risk the credibility of liberal leaders who
told their flocks they only supported blessings. It would show a lack of the patience which is implied in the
idea of doctrinal reception. It would fail to hear the voice of wisdom saying “enough is enough. 
If the Church is not really interested in hearing from conservative theologians like me on this issue, what am I
to do with the remainder of my airtime? The truly pressing issue before the Church is the following: Will
room be found for the loyal opposition, for conservative Episcopalians? Is our Church to be truly liberal, and
will it live up to the claim it makes about its own comprehensiveness? After all our talk about “the other 
nowadays, what will liberal Episcopalians do with the fact that “the other  is in many cases a traditional
Evangelical or Anglo-Catholic or charismatic? Years ago, at an event for Episcopal Foundation fellows, my
friend Paul Zahl said that the great ethical challenge for those in power in the national Church now is how to
deal with its relatively powerless conservative minority. This question is yet more urgent when that minority
also happens to have the weight of the tradition and the strongest bonds of affection with the wider
Communion on its side.
I was taught in my seminary days about F. D. Maurice’s vision of a kind of liberal Anglicanism that needed all
its parties, each one challenging the other like flint. I have my own issues with Maurice, but surely he was the
forerunner of modern Anglicanism. Is there the will, not to mention the theological virtues of faith, hope,
and love, on the part of the majority, to live out this vision? Will the Church encourage that freedom of
theological expression which we are proud of in the breadth of our tradition? Do we mean it when we talk
about the value of conscience in our Anglican tradition, especially for dioceses and parishes in the coming
years? In this vein, is the Church willing to guarantee them access to the traditional rite of marriage, come
what may, as a concrete step toward assuring a real comprehensiveness? I was, I assume, asked to respond
to this document as a gesture of inclusion, and so it is the question of real and costly inclusion that I wish to
bring before the Church.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

52 of 158

f. Fredrica Harris Thompsett
Fredrica Harris Thompsett is the Mary Wolfe Professor Emerita of Historical Theology
at the Episcopal Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts

I do remember my baptism. I was an eight-year-old Episcopalian and fascinated by the strong promises made
in my behalf. The minister used the office for children, yet we—my twin brother and I—kept adding in the “I
will’s  and “I do’s.  The promise that we might be granted the “power and strength  to “triumph against
the devil, the world, and the flesh  (1928 BCP, 278) was, to say the least, unforgettable to my young mind.
This was strong stuff, well worthy of the joyous family celebration that followed.
Recently the modern liturgical renewal movement has strengthened and brought Holy Baptism into greater
visibility across many denominations. For Episcopalians these positive revisions in Holy Baptism are
represented in the 1979 Book of Common Prayer. Today there are more occasions for congregations to
celebrate Holy Baptism and together commit and recommit themselves to the challenges conveyed in the
Baptismal Covenant. This liturgical shift has restored baptism’s prominence in shaping our religious identity
both as individuals and as worshiping communities. As a theologian and historian, I know that these changes
in contemporary liturgies of baptism not only restore early Christian practices, they also align with distinct
Anglican theological emphases.
Baptism is foundational. When I reflect theologically on how God is working today in our relationships and
faithful living, I am drawn again and again to consider promises made and reaffirmed in baptism. Of
particular importance in baptism and other sacraments is the generosity of God’s covenantal love. Today’s
celebrations of baptism move us liturgically closer to glimpsing and understanding covenanting
partnerships. Moreover, in our experience of promises publicly made in gathered community, we are
affirming and welcoming individual lifetimes of godly living. We are moving away from worship patterns that
unintentionally privatized and obscured the fact of God’s great goodness in creation. In blessing lifelong
relationships we are also, I believe, representing significant aspects of our Anglican heritage. Both in
traditional marriage rites and in the proposed blessing of committed relationships of same-sex couples, the
characteristics I first encountered as an eight-year-old child have been strengthened and extended.
For some Episcopalians the impetus to respond to our sisters and brothers who are gay and lesbian by
providing ways to bless same-sex couples is primarily occasioned by secular cultural changes and has little to
do with theological understandings. In this brief essay I wish to point to the theological continuity of our
baptismal practices with the current call to reflect on how God is working today in committed same-sex
relationships. In effect, the patterns of worship our Prayer Book prescribes have strengthened
understanding of committed lifelong relationships. Three overlapping theological components are central
both to baptism and to blessing same-sex unions. These are: (1) deepened insight into our covenantal
relationship with God in Christ; (2) the public character and value of individuals and congregations sharing
God’s blessings; and (3) continuity with positive Anglican perspectives on committed intimate relationships.
Like most biblical covenants, the Baptismal Covenant is deeply grounded in the generosity of God’s love. Our
Hebraic ancestors, whether in the covenants of Noah, Abraham and Sarah, Moses, or Jeremiah, emphasized
the steadfast loving-kindness of the Creator. The Hebrew word hesed is frequently used in these biblical
texts. It is usually translated as “loving-kindness  and associated as a sure and steadfast foundation for
covenantal living. There is nothing simple or short-lived about covenantal love. The foundation for
covenantal theology is the expectant love and uncompromising faithfulness that God holds for God’s people
for generations to come. Our biblical ancestors emphasized the magnitude of God’s empowering action, call,
and summons into lifelong relationship. Biblical expressions of covenant thinking today are central for those
of us who wish to be addressed by God and respond to God’s presence in our lives.
Over the past thirty-five years, guided by the 1979 Book of Common Prayer, Episcopalians have become more
familiar with the concept of covenantal relationships with God. This is underscored educationally in the
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

53 of 158

Outline of the Faith, which describes a covenant as “a relationship initiated by God, to which a body of
people responds in faith  (BCP, 846). It is underscored liturgically in the Baptismal Covenant (BCP, 304–305).
Baptism is an expression of a sacramental covenant in which we are adopted, that is chosen, as God’s own
children and incorporated into full membership in Christ’s Church. In the Synoptic Gospels’ telling of our
Lord’s baptism, Jesus is proclaimed as God’s “Son, the Beloved,  with whom God is “well pleased 
(Matthew 3:17, Mark 1:11, Luke 3:22b). In our baptism we too are adopted as God’s “own children  and
“marked as Christ’s own for ever  (BCP, 311, 308). Baptism reveals God’s generosity in creation, God’s
steadfast loving-kindness. God’s gracious gift of baptism incorporates and extends our lives into God’s
mission. In contemporary worship experiences we have moved closer, as in marriage and same-sex
blessings, to glimpsing and proclaiming the blessing of covenanting relationships.
Baptism is not simply or only an individual decision. As a covenant, this sacrament is about God acting and
the community of faith responding. Therefore the service of Holy Baptism is more than a private family
matter, and it is designed for public occasions. Even as baptism has been restored in the 1979 Book of
Common Prayer to a joyous place of graceful prominence in Episcopal worship, so too blessing of same-sex
relationships offers an opportunity for public expression of God’s abundant grace and goodness. Some
same-sex couples, their family, friends, and other community members may experience restoration, healing,
and forgiveness. Blessing services signal acceptance, affirmation, commitment, and ongoing support from
God, from the Church, and from gathered family and friends. For those whose intimate relationships may
have in the past been hidden, despised, shunned, ignored, or dismissed, the promise of new life in Christ is
liberating. I am reminded of the freedom from cultural and social barriers promised by Paul in Galatians 3:27–
28: “As many of you as were baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ. There is no longer Jew
or Greek, there is now no longer slave or free, there is no longer male and female; for all of you are one in
Christ Jesus.  Paul envisioned baptism as overcoming all that separates human beings from one another and
from God. God’s promise of freedom and shared life in Christ replaces all prior identities and divisions.
In my experience the public character of blessing same-sex unions provides opportunities for pastoral
witness and reconciliation. I remember experiencing with joyful tears a blessing service held for a couple
who had been faithfully committed to one another for more than fifty years. They were described by others
as “pillars of our congregation.  Over the years their many gifts of service and stewardship had been
welcomed, yet their loving, lifelong, committed relationship had not previously been even acknowledged, let
alone blessed. For my homosexual sisters and brothers the public assurance of God’s presence and
affirmation of their most intimate relationships has been a long time coming.
Anglican perspectives on committed intimate relationships have traditionally emphasized the loving
relational character of matrimony. Early on in the Reformation our Episcopal ancestors were among the first
modern Christians to put a loving spin on marriage. Thomas Cranmer, an Archbishop of Canterbury and the
primary author of the earliest editions of the English Book of Common Prayer, crafted a liturgy which
underscored marriage as a positive opportunity for mutual enjoyment. Cranmer—himself a happily, if
quietly, married man with children—emphasized the benefit of marriage for England’s citizens. Marriage
was, he said in the 1549 Form of the Solemnization of Matrimony, for the “mutual society, help, and comfort,
that the one ought to have of the other, both in prosperity and adversity.  Perhaps with his own “dearly
beloved Margaret Cranmer  in mind, it was Cranmer who was the first to add to the official Church of
England marriage text the promise that each partner would “love and cherish  the other. These words
replaced the wife’s required oath in a late medieval service to be “buxom in bed and board.  Archbishop
Cranmer’s perspective on committed loving relationships benefited the couple, the Church, and the wider
society. In the shifting context of the English Reformation, Cranmer seized opportunities for significant
liturgical, theological, and social change. These were expressed in the new English Book of Common Prayer.
In worship and common prayer, cultural attitudes and expectations for married couples were shaped anew.
What I suggest here is that liturgical resources for blessing same-sex relationships have much in common
with positive Anglican perspectives on loving and faithful relationships. Archbishop Cranmer recognized
marriage as a vital social institution grounded in ideals of mutuality, help, and comfort. The trajectory from a
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

54 of 158

sixteenth-century archbishop to an early twenty-first-century Chief Justice of Massachusetts is slim at best.
Yet it might be of interest to note that in the 2003 ruling that allowed Massachusetts to become the first
state to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples, Chief Justice Margaret Marshall argued that neither
Church nor society should hoard the values bestowed in marriage or take their wider societal beneficial
intent for granted.5 Marshall, herself a practicing Episcopalian, argued that this ruling affirmed “the dignity
and equality of all individuals.  Could it be that she was influenced by the Baptismal Covenant’s promise to
“respect the dignity of every human being  (BCP, 305)? Could it be that common prayer has had a steadily
progressive impact influencing both individual hearts and societal laws?
I am on firmer, far less conjectural, theological ground in naming Incarnational theology as a central aspect
of Anglican theology. In Anglican theology the legacy of the Incarnation has become a cherished focal point,
a guiding principle shaping Anglican understandings of human and divinity alike. Michael Ramsey, who many
may remember as one of the great Archbishops of Canterbury of the twentieth century, concluded that “the
Incarnation meant not only that God took human flesh but that human nature was raised up to share in the
life of God. 6 The redemptive work of the Incarnation provides the foundation for Anglican optimism about
humanity. This God not only creates but also restores the dignity of human nature. This God in Christ
partakes of the fullness of human life. This God bears the full range of love’s power, including the capacity to
instill and invite devotion, passion, affection, and sexuality expressed in our most intimate relationships.
Biblical scholar and Anglican theologian L. William Countryman has noted that baptism interprets the
goodness of the gifts bestowed by God in creation.7 The blessing of covenanted couples, whether same-sex
or different-sex partners, reminds us of the worth of intimate human relationships established by God in
creation. In the blessing of covenanted couples and in marriage rites the goodness of faithful sexual intimacy
is affirmed. Incarnational theology and baptismal theology alike proclaim that, in Jesus, God is with us in a
new way. Similarly, in marriage, as in the blessing of covenanted couples, the newness of life in Christ is
affirmed by both the couple and the wider community.
I have emphasized the theological grounding that the sacrament of Holy Baptism offers for other
expressions of covenantal love. It might not be a stretch to recall and adapt a saying articulated forty years
ago when the Episcopal Church was debating the ordination of women: “If you are not going to ordain
women, stop baptizing them.  Anglican theologian Marilyn McCord Adams commends this saying as
“forwarding a strong doctrine of baptism.  She contends, as I do, that “the strong doctrine of baptism is
radical and bears repeating. 8 When considering the opportunity to bless covenanted same-sex couples, a
similar baptismally-grounded axiom might be: “If we are not open to blessing committed relationships of
same-sex couples, we should stop baptizing them.  The covenant of baptism offers a lifelong foundation for
deepening other covenanted relationships of love and service to God’s reconciling mission. Anglican
Christians are known for finding integrity and coherence in the ways our patterns of worship shape our
beliefs. As the theological resources in “I Will Bless You, and You Will Be a Blessing  indicate, promises
affirmed by baptism shape an encouraging framework for blessing faithful relationships of covenanted love.

5
The landmark ruling “Goodridge vs. the Department of Health,  was decided by the State Appellate Court in November of 2003 and
became law in May of 2004. It has withstood attempts to replace the word “marriage  with less embracing matrimonial terminology
like “civil unions.  In November of 2009, Episcopal Bishop M. Thomas Shaw, following a permissive (though not obligatory) action of
General Convention for bishops in states which legally allow same-sex marriage, permitted clergy in the Diocese of Massachusetts to
officiate at same-sex weddings.
6
On the centrality of the Incarnation in Ramsey’s theology see Kenneth Leech, “‘The Real Archbishop’: A Profile of Michael Ramsey, 
The Christian Century (March 12, 1986): 266–69.
7
See L. William Countryman, Living on the Border of the Holy: Renewing the Priesthood of All (Harrisburg: Morehouse Publishing),
especially chapter 5, 81-110,
8
See Marilyn McCord Adams, “The Ordination of Women: Some Theological Implications,  in Looking Forward, Looking Backward:
Forty Years of Women’s Ordination, ed. Fredrica Harris Thompsett (New York: Morehouse Publishing, 2014), 72–73.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

55 of 158

IV. HEARING, SEEING, AND
DECLARING NEW THINGS
Pastoral Resources for Preparing Couples
for a Liturgy of Blessing or Marriage

Contents
IV. Hearing, Seeing, and Declaring New Things:
Pastoral Resources for Preparing Couples for a Liturgy of Blessing or Marriage
Overview: Pastoral Care for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
1. Available Resources: Materials for Pastoral Preparation
2. Particular Issues Affecting Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
3. Presenters
4. Outline of Pre-Blessing/Marriage Preparation for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
Handouts
1. Theological Reflection on Covenantal Relationship: Spiritual Practice for
Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
2. Declaration of Intention for Marriage
3. Declaration of Intention for Lifelong Covenant
4. About Presenters—For the Couple
5. Information for Presenters
6. Model Congregational Guidelines

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

56 of 158

IV. Hearing, Seeing, and
Declaring New Things
Pastoral Resources for Preparing Couples
for a Liturgy of Blessing or Marriage

Overview: Pastoral Care for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
You have heard; now see all this; and will you not declare it? From this time
forward I make you hear new things, hidden things that you have not known.
—Isaiah 48:6
I will give you as a light to the nations,
that my salvation may reach to the end of the earth.
—Isaiah 49:6

The pastoral resources in this essay are provided to assist clergy and trained lay people who are preparing
gender and sexual minority1 couples for marriage or a blessing of their relationship, using one of the liturgies
authorized by The Episcopal Church. For couples preparing for a blessing, the expectation of such
preparation is equivalent to the canonical requirement that couples preparing for marriage receive
instruction “in the nature, purpose, and meaning, as well as the rights, duties and responsibilities of
marriage  (Canon I.18.3[c]).
Preparation is similar for all couples, whether gender and sexual minority or different-sex/gender. Most
clergy and lay people who currently offer premarital preparation to different-sex couples are more than
capable of working with gender and sexual minority couples. However, understanding the differences is
necessary—and helpful.
The pastoral resources described in this essay address differences in the preparation of gender and sexual
minority couples and different-sex couples and include some of the available resources for preparing gender
and sexual minority couples for marriage or the blessing of their relationship.

Commonly Used Terms for Gender and/or Sexual Minorities
Because human sexuality exists on a spectrum, because the number of possible identities that communities
or individuals may craft (consciously and unconsciously) defies limitation, and because language constantly
evolves, terminology for gender and sexual minorities (GSM) sometimes proves elusive. As a general
1

The term “gender and sexual minorities  (GSM) is increasingly used in academic study of gender/sexual identity and/or orientation,
recognizing the complexity of both human biology and the social construction of gender and sexuality. This term is used in this
pastoral resource except when referring to marriage, since “same-sex marriage  is commonly used in civil law.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

57 of 158

consideration, it is always best to refer to someone by name, not a category, and to ask people how they
identify themselves or prefer to be called. It is not as important that the preparer fully understand the
complexities of identity and/or orientation as that the couple themselves do; however, clergy and lay
preparers are encouraged to read some of the excellent resources available about GSM experiences or to
consult with a professional.
The Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD)—an organization that advises media and other
organizations concerning the language and images they use to represent GSM people and issues—provides
extensive, widely used, and highly readable reference guides for commonly used terminology. Some
common terms are described below with reference to the glossary available at glaad.org. For a more
comprehensive consideration, you may also wish to consult An Ally’s Guide to Terminology: Talking About
LGBT People & Equality, published by GLAAD.
Sex: The biological condition of being male or female is typically identified visually at birth based on
visible anatomy of the newborn. However, for a variety of reasons the sex of a person cannot always
be definitively determined from visual assessment. While sex differences are biological, biology is
flexible, dynamic, and not unaffected by environment and culture. Furthermore, it is important to
bear in mind that biology does not determine identity.
Gender Identity and Expression: Individuals usually have a stable, deep, and strongly felt sense of
their own gender that manifests very early in childhood; that gender identity, however, may not
always correspond to the person’s sex. A person whose gender identity does not correspond with
the sex assigned at birth may be called a transgender person (though individuals sometimes use or
prefer other language). The GLAAD “Media Reference Guide—Transgender Issues  describes
transgender as “an umbrella term for people whose gender identity and/or gender expression differs
from what is typically associated with the sex they were assigned at birth. 2 Transgender people
who, through surgery and/or hormone treatment, alter their biological sex to align with their gender
identity are sometimes called transsexual, though the term is not preferred by all. It should be noted,
however, that not all transgender people are able or wish to medically alter their biological sex.
A person’s internal gender identity may or may not be expressed to society. Gender expression
refers to how an individual manifests gender to society, including “one’s name, pronouns, clothing,
haircut, behavior, voice, or body characteristics. 3 Societies typically associate these characteristics
with masculinity and femininity; however, the associations vary from culture to culture. Transgender
people often express the gender with which they internally identify in ways that their society will
recognize; others, though, both transgender and cisgender (a term used to describe nontransgender people), develop expressions that are intentionally gender non-conforming.
While many people understand themselves as being a man or a woman, others identify themselves in
ways that are not limited by this traditional binary. Sometimes those who resist or reject the
traditional gender categories identify themselves as “genderqueer  (though this term is not
universal).4
Sexual Orientation: Although they are often associated with each other, gender identity and sexual
orientation do not have a direct correspondence. For instance, a transgender man5 (someone who
2

http://glaad.org/reference/transgender.
http://glaad.org/reference/transgender.
4
For stories of transgender Episcopalians, see “Voices of Witness: Out of the Box,  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v
=QzCANWGsEdc.
5
While some transgender people do describe themselves as a “transgender man/woman  others prefer the language man/woman
without the modifier. Still others resist the gender binary altogether. Because individual perceptions and preferences vary, it is best
not to assign a category (or a pronoun) to someone without asking how they understand and prefer to talk about their own gender
identity.
3

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

58 of 158

was assigned the female sex at birth, but identifies as a man) who is sexually drawn to women is
considered “straight. 
Rather than “homosexual,  which carries offensive, negative connotations for many, the preferred
term for someone “whose enduring physical, romantic and/or emotional attractions are to people of
the same sex 6 is “gay  or “gay person.  Some women prefer to use the term “lesbian  while others
prefer “gay woman.  A person whose sexual orientation encompasses people of both the same and
different sex are generally called “bisexual  or “bi.  Despite common assumptions to the contrary,
“[b]isexual people need not have had specific sexual experiences to be bisexual; in fact, they need
not have had any sexual experience at all to identify as bisexual. 7 A significant number of gay,
lesbian, and bi people have adopted the formerly offensive term “queer  to describe themselves or
GSM people more generally; however, the term continues to be offensive to others and should not
be used to describe someone unless they express an explicit preference for it.

Contextual Competence
Clergy and qualified lay people preparing couples for marriages or blessings need to be contextually
competent, a concept derived from cultural competence. In fields such as health care, social work, and
education, culturally competent professionals embody awareness, a positive attitude, knowledge, and skills
that enable them to work effectively in cross-cultural situations.
Consider the different situations that one might encounter when preparing a couple for a blessing or marriage:
•

Preparing a couple in their seventies for a blessing of their relationship is very different from
preparing a couple in their twenties.

•

Preparing a couple entering a new relationship is different from preparing two people who have
been living in a committed relationship for a long time.

•

Preparing an interracial couple differs in some aspects from preparing a couple of the same race.

•

Preparing a couple without children differs from preparing parents.

Being “contextually competent  means understanding and appreciating these, and many more, differing
situations. Clergy and trained lay preparers need to examine their own contextual competence as they
consider working with GSM couples. If they cannot work with a GSM couple with appreciation and
awareness, then the best practice is to refer the couple to another clergyperson or trained lay preparer, and
seek further training for themselves.
The materials below will help clergy and trained lay preparers adapt their skills to work with GSM couples in
a contextually competent manner.

1. Available Resources: Materials for Pastoral Preparation
In a 2010 churchwide survey regarding pastoral and teaching materials, the Standing Commission on Liturgy
and Music found that the following resources are among those commonly used to prepare GSM couples for
a blessing.

6
7

http://www.glaad.org/reference/lgb.
http://www.glaad.org/reference/lgb

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

59 of 158

Prepare/Enrich (Life Innovations, Inc.)
https://www.prepare-enrich.com
•

A relationship inventory that assesses couples’ strengths and growth areas on topics such as
finances, communication, conflict resolution, and sexuality. This assessment tool is by far the one
used most frequently among respondents to the Commission’s survey. “Facilitators  (the term
that Prepare/Enrich employs) must be trained in its use; see website for cost of materials.

•

Positives: recently revised (2008), customized version easily used with GSM couples; uses the
language of “partner ; most comprehensive tool to address personality, conflict resolution,
family, health, and financial and spiritual issues; assesses goals, strengths, and growth areas;
large, national norm base (more than five hundred thousand couples).

•

Negatives: currently, research results are standardized only for different-sex/gender couples, so
there is no “norm  against which to compare a GSM couple’s data.

Premarriage Awareness Inventory (Logos Productions)
http://www3.logosproductions.com
•

Preferred by those not trained in Prepare/Enrich.

•

Positives: three customized formats, including inventories for those living together or previously
married; thorough personality assessment; coverage of major areas, such as faith, finances,
family of origin, children, power issues, life goals.

•

Negatives: standardized for different-sex/gender couples only, but author indicates that he will
be implementing a GSM version (no target date given).

The Marriage Journey: Preparation and Provisions for Life Together,
by Linda Grenz and Delbert Glover (Church Publishing, 2003)
•

Recommended by those who find online inventories impersonal.

•

Positives: Uses “partner  instead of specifying gender; includes material for couples living
together and those with children; clear, direct language; ideal for the technologically challenged
couple.

•

Negatives: no personality assessment included.

The following books were published too recently to be cited by respondents to the 2010 survey. Because
they specifically address pastoral needs of same-gender couples, we include them among available
resources.
•

All Whom God Has Joined: Resources for Clergy and Same-Gender Loving Couples
by Leanne McCall Tigert and Maren C. Tirabassi (Pilgrim Press, 2010).

•

Premarital Counseling for Gays and Lesbians: Case Studies and Helpful Questions
by Pamela Milam (ASD Publishing, 2012).

2. Particular Issues Affecting Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
Issues or differences that are particular to gender and sexual minority (GSM) couples are not necessarily
challenges in preparation. They are more often gifts, especially if the clergyperson or layperson preparing a
couple understands variation as part of God’s plan for the world and a sign of God’s blessing. Contextual
competence is important here, especially in a preparer’s awareness of places where skills for preparing
different-sex/gender couples do not transfer to GSM couples. In addition, preparers need to examine their

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

60 of 158

own understanding of marrying or blessing a GSM couple, as well as the assumptions of the couple’s faith
and civil communities, including diocesan authority and various state laws.
GSM couples come to ask for marriage or a blessing with a variety of life backgrounds; thus provision for
some variations and differences appear, for example, in the prayer choices in the liturgy. Other variations
that clergy or lay preparers will meet in their work with GSM couples follow below.8

Same-Sex Marriages, Canon Law, and Diocesan Policies
Canon I.18.1 requires clergy to “conform to the laws of the State governing the creation of the civil status of
marriage.  With the U.S. Supreme Court ruling issued on June 26, 2015, GSM couples may be married in any
U.S. jurisdiction. In dioceses outside the United States, civil law varies, and clergy must familiarize
themselves with the law applicable in their context.
General Convention Resolution 2015-A054 authorizes “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Marriage  and “The
Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage 2  for trial use, and Canon I.18.1 allows clergy to solemnize a marriage
of a GSM couple, using either of these liturgical forms, provided that the marriage is permitted by civil law
and that the clergyperson follows the provisions of Canons I.18 and I.19. The resolution stipulates that
“bishops exercising ecclesiastical authority or, where appropriate, ecclesiastical supervision will make
provision for all couples asking to be married in this Church to have access to these liturgies,  while also
requiring that the liturgies be used “under the direction and with the permission of the Diocesan Bishop. 
Clergy and couples seeking to be married must follow the policies of their diocese when preparing to use
one of these-trial use liturgies for marriage.
General Convention Resolution 2015-A054 also authorizes the use of “The Witnessing and Blessing of a
Lifelong Covenant  for use “under the direction and with the permission of the bishop exercising
ecclesiastical authority.  This liturgy is intended for use with GSM couples in jurisdictions where same-sex
marriage is not legal. Clergy and couples seeking a blessing must follow the policies or guidelines of their
diocese.
Canon I.19.3 sets out requirements that must be followed in cases of remarriage after divorce or dissolution
of a marriage. Because some dioceses require professional counseling for a couple if one member of the
couple (or both) has been divorced more than once or has had more than one previous long-term
relationship, clergy should check with the diocesan office for guidance on what is expected in such
situations.
For clergy who feel they cannot solemnize a marriage or confer a liturgical blessing for any GSM couple, the
best practice is to refer the couple to another clergyperson. Some of these clergy may also wish to provide
an additional pastoral response to those couples, thereby affirming and supporting their desire for God’s
blessing upon their relationship.
Currently, very few denominations authorize their clergy to conduct same-sex blessings or marriages, so an
Episcopal clergyperson may be approached by a couple seeking a blessing of their union simply because it is
not an option for them within their own denomination. Episcopal clergy may expect that some of these
couples from other denominations feel tender and vulnerable in their relationship to the wider Church and
so may need particular nurture and support.

Possible Issues Arising from Sexual Orientation or Gender Identity
This section addresses some of the more common issues that may arise in the process of preparing a GSM
couple for marriage or a blessing of their lifelong covenant.
8

This material is adapted from “Pastoral Resources for Province One Episcopal Clergy Ministering to Same-Gender Couples. 

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

61 of 158

“Late bloomers  who “come out  later in life: Some GSM people recognize their sexual orientation or gender
identity from a very young age. Others may have a growing realization that does not become fully clear until
much later in life; some may have understood their sexual orientation or gender identity for some time but
are only recently “coming out  publicly. A “late bloomer  may need some time to begin to live into his/her
truest life or explore with a counselor this core change in self-perception before entering into a lifelong
commitment.
Previous relationships: Some individuals may have lived a heterosexual life to a point, perhaps inwardly
questioning their sexual orientation or gender identity, before deciding that they felt more strongly toward
people of the same sex or gender; others may have simply fallen in love with someone of the same sex or
gender, perhaps by surprise. Still others may have accepted their own bisexuality and at one point decided
to make a commitment to a person of a different sex/gender. These earlier relationships may have been
more or less satisfactory depending on the extent to which familial, societal, and/or religious expectations
played a part, and the compatibility between the partners. There are likely to be many important
relationships from these earlier partnerships which will need to be honored and successfully incorporated
into the life of the new couple.
Internalized homophobia: One or both members of a GSM couple may have been subjected to a continual
societal onslaught of negative or stereotypical messages. These messages may have been internalized,
possibly resulting in a person growing severely uncomfortable with his/her sexual orientation or gender
identity. A clergyperson or trained lay preparer who perceives that a person has significant negative feelings
or stigma about his/her orientation may appropriately refer the person for counseling with a therapist
trained to handle this issue.
Biphobia: Bisexuality is sometimes unfairly and inaccurately associated with promiscuity and infidelity. This
prejudice is found among people of varying sexual orientations, including other GSM people. Bi people are
not more or less inclined to sexual license than any other people; clergy and lay preparers should guard
against making assumptions about bisexuals.

Long-Term Relationships
Preparers may be working with people who have been together for many years or have previously had longterm, monogamous relationships. This means that preparers must be open to learning and benefiting from
the wisdom generated by a couple’s long years together.

Particular Hurt
One or both members of a GSM couple may have been wounded by exclusion or marginalization, that is,
experiences and feelings of being “other  or “less than.  Certainly, GSM people are at risk of being victims
of abuse or exploitation, as well as self-hatred and fear of rejection. Clergy and laypeople preparing GSM
couples for marriage or blessings need to be sensitive to these issues.
Very often, due to prior experiences with organized religions who reject and do not approve of GSM people
or relationships, these individuals do not feel welcome in a house of worship. In addition, one or both
members of the couple may have a history of being excluded from benefits that heterosexuals receive from
the State. For the couple, a clergyperson or layperson providing marriage or blessing preparation represents
the Church, so a preparer will need to build a trusting relationship with the couple in order to support them
in dealing with the anger, hurt, or confusion that erupts from rejection.

In or Out?
Although a couple is seeking a public union, one or even both members of the couple may need to remain
“closeted  in some aspects of their individual lives. For instance, one person may be employed in a
workplace or profession where being “out  could jeopardize the ability to function there at top form or even
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

62 of 158

to continue to work there. Unfortunately, a prime example is the Church. For GSM clergy in many
denominations, “coming out,  especially when in a relationship, can result in being stripped of the ability to
function as ordained clergy or to hold any position of leadership in the Church. In secular places of
employment, where GSM people might be protected by law, their sexual orientation or gender identity
could affect their ability to be hired or result in a tense and unfriendly work environment. Being “out  could
have a negative impact on seeking or maintaining a position in public office. Lesbians and gays serving in the
military no longer need to remain closeted, but many who were in the military previous to this change might
need to talk about their pasts as closeted members of the armed services.
GSM couples take risks, even to their lives, when they display affection in public; when they cannot hold
hands, they hold secrets. Because of this, there can be tension in a relationship when one person is fully
“out  and comfortable with some public, visible displays of affection while the other is not. In some work
situations, one person in the relationship may need to be careful when calling a partner at the workplace or
taking messages at home.
Couples need to discuss when, where, and with whom it is safe to be open about their relationship in
general. Specifically, as part of their preparation, they need to discuss each other’s comfort levels and needs
regarding making their relationship known in a public ceremony.

Relational History and Resolution of Previous Relationships
All couples have to deal with what went before. GSM couples may not be going through legal divorces, but
as with any relationship, they will still likely need to process issues related to their previous relationships on
an emotional and practical level. Couples will be freer to proceed into a new lifelong committed relationship
when they have processed what one or the other has learned from earlier relationships and when they have
resolved matters of finance, property, child custody, and responsibility to former spouses or partners.

Families of Origin
Most clergy and trained laypersons inquire about each individual’s family of origin when preparing differentsex/gender couples for marriage. The answers can give the couple insights regarding a number of issues,
including their understanding of what a healthy or unhealthy relationship looks like and their attitudes
toward finances and parenting practices; the responses may also enable couples to identify unresolved
issues that could affect the relationship.
One area which may be unique to GSM couples is their families’ responses to their orientation, their public
lives as GSM people, and their life together as a couple. Couples will benefit from exploring questions such
as: Have the individuals “come out  to their own families? If so, what was the response? Has either member
of a couple told his/her family about the intended marriage or blessing liturgy? Is the family supportive,
hostile, or grieving, or simply absent? How will each family respond to the individual’s partner: will the family
define a partner as a spouse and therefore part of the family, or will they treat one’s partner as a friend or
roommate? In other words, has the couple discussed what they anticipate their relationship with the in-laws
will be as they enter into a lifelong, committed relationship? Likewise, is the couple able to engage a network
of support, individually and as a couple, and do they perceive how it will become a part of their new life
together?

Legal Matters
For different-sex/gender couples, marriage automatically comes with legal protections and obligations
(above and beyond the legality of the union itself). In civil jurisdictions outside the United States where no
civil union or same-sex marriage is allowed, it is critical that GSM couples pursue private legal protections
that substitute for some of the legal protections flowing from civil marriage (though private measures
cannot cover all of the legal attributes of civil marriage). The couple should consider arranging for medical
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

63 of 158

and financial durable powers-of-attorney, wills, and living wills, and may need to seek professional advice
regarding financial and property matters. In addition, couples should consider soliciting legal advice on their
rights and risks, especially regarding issues of tax, Social Security, or other state and federal legal matters.

Children
As with any different-sex/gender, childless couple preparing for marriage, GSM couples should also discuss
with each other whether one or the other wants children. This discussion might include topics such as when
and how to have children, the impact of children on finances and employment, and matters of parenting,
such as childcare and discipline. Couples entering the relationship with children should discuss how to help
the children adjust and integrate into the new family constellation. GSM couples, especially those blessed
with children from a previous relationship, also need to support their children through various stages of
development, particularly as the children relate to their peers, who may have no understanding of, or
possibly even a hostile reaction to, a friend with GSM parents. For example, if a parent becomes involved
with a GSM partner, it may be controversial and require some adjustment in their child’s social circle.
GSM couples should be aware of the legal ambiguity pertaining to custodial cases and may want to seek
counsel to protect themselves and their children.

3. Presenters
Presenters are people chosen by the couple to support and present them to the presider and the assembly
during the marriage or blessing liturgy. The liturgies include the option of presenters, just as some
congregations offer to different-sex/gender couples. This option gives a voice to important people in the life
of the couple during the liturgy and enriches the experience for all present. Presenters can also serve an
important role in supporting the couple before and after the blessing liturgy. The selection of a couple
mature in their relationship can be particularly helpful to a couple starting life together. The couple, together
with the clergy or lay preparer, should talk as soon as possible about selecting presenters, so that the
prayerful work of the presenters can begin early on.
Two short handouts provided in this pastoral resource (one for the couple and one for presenters) detail the
role of presenters and are intended for use at the conclusion of the initial preparation session. They are
designed for use with “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant  and “The Witnessing and
Blessing of a Marriage.  Congregations offering presenters for “The Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage
2  can use these handouts by substituting the text of the presentation from the Additional Directions on
page 000.

4. Outline of Pre-Blessing / Marriage Preparation
for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
Below is a guideline for a five-session, pre-blessing/marriage preparation that may be used along with the
materials described above. In a 2010 churchwide survey regarding pastoral and teaching materials, the
Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music found that a large number of trained lay preparers and clergy
want a very specific template; however, those with experience preparing couples may choose to adapt,
combine, or reorder this outline. Ideally, sessions last 60 to 90 minutes each, and both partners should be
present for all sessions (although the preparer may decide to meet with one of the individuals to address
specific issues).

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

64 of 158

Goal
Pre-blessing/marriage preparation sets as its goal the strengthening of a lifelong, monogamous partnership
rooted in Christ. General Convention Resolution 2000–D039 addresses the hope—the Church’s and the
couple’s—for an enduring relationship:
Resolved, That we expect such relationships will be characterized by fidelity, monogamy,
mutual affection and respect, careful, honest communication, and the holy love which
enables those in such relationships to see in each other the image of God; and be it further
Resolved, That we denounce promiscuity, exploitation, and abusiveness in the relationships
of any of our members; and be it further
Resolved, That this Church intends to hold all its members accountable to these values, and
will provide for them the prayerful support, encouragement, and pastoral care necessary to
live faithfully by them.

Expectations
Realities:
• Clergy and lay people are trained in many different ways to conduct premarital preparation.
•

Clergy and trained lay people apply a wide variety of methods for pre-blessing/marriage
preparation.

Assumptions:
• The priest or bishop is prepared to preside at the blessing/marriage.
•

The clergyperson or trained lay preparer is experienced in preparing couples before marriages
and / or blessings.

•

The clergyperson or trained lay preparer is willing to refer the couple to a professional therapist
should circumstances warrant.

Truth:
• Each couple is unique, requiring adaptations as appropriate.

Preparing Gender and Sexual Minority Couples in Long-term Relationships
When preparing people who have been together for many years, the session structure may need to be
changed, and fewer sessions may be needed. One suggestion is to adapt the first session to get to know the
couple, introduce the liturgy, and so on. The second session could employ the following questions or
discussion topics, which respect the length of the couple’s relationship and invite them to discuss their
understanding of the Church.
•

What does it mean to you to have your relationship blessed by the Church after all these years?

•

How will having the Church’s blessing and making a commitment in public, even if you have done
so privately or in a non-church setting, affect you or your relationship?

•

What can your relationship teach the Church?

Finally, the third session could be adapted from the current fifth session: wrapping up, clarifying the liturgy,
and fielding any other questions that may have arisen.

Session One: Getting To Know You and an Overview
This session focuses on getting to know one another. It also starts to address the details of the rite, offering
the couple and the clergyperson an opportunity to study the rites together, looking at their meaning and
choices and affirming that the blessing, grounded in God, is given through the Church. Some clergy,

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

65 of 158

however, may prefer to do a very general overview of the rites in this session, then study them more
intensely later in the process.
Addressing the practical issues of the blessing or marriage at the outset helps to build trust and allows the
couple to open themselves to the substance of the next four sessions. By providing even a general overview
of the rites, the preparer can address questions and alleviate anxieties about the actual day. For a marriage,
the couple and clergyperson officiating will need to decide, either in this session or later in the preparation,
which rite to use.
Session One includes a great deal of material, some of which may be moved to another session. Handouts
for this session include:
•

The liturgy “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant ; for a marriage, the preparer
may have all of the rites available to review with the couple.

•

1. Theological Reflection on Covenantal Relationship: Spiritual Practice for Gender and Sexual
Minority Couples (found at the end of this outline).

•

2. Declaration of Intention for Marriage OR 3. Declaration of Intention for Lifelong Covenant (found
at the end of this outline).

•

4. About Presenters—For the Couple (found at the end of this outline).

•

5. Information for Presenters (found at the end of this outline).

Outline of Session One
•

Pray together.

•

Get to know one another (varies as to how well the preparer knows the couple).

•

Explore the couples’ religious backgrounds, their experiences with the church(es), and their
reasons for being in this congregation.

•

Reflect on the theological significance of the couple’s relationship. The handout Theological
Reflection on Covenantal Relationship: Spiritual Practice for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
may be useful in this discussion. (This reflection might be moved to a later session.)

•

Review and ask the couple to sign the Declaration of Intention for Marriage or Declaration of
Intention for Lifelong Covenant.

•

Walk through the blessing rite or marriage rites, raising theological issues and naming liturgical
choices:





Discuss the eucharist as normative in the service. However, including a celebration of the
eucharist may not be appropriate if only one member of the couple is Christian.
Emphasize the difference between a civil service and an ecclesial blessing.
Answer general questions regarding details of the service and the Church’s practice.
Introduce the possibility of presenters.

At the end of the session, provide written handouts and suggest “homework  topics for the couple to think
about for Sessions Two and Three:
•

Families of origin and growing up in them:

•

What worked and didn’t work so well in their families of origin (this topic may also influence
work in Session Four).
 Family Church/religious history as well as each individual’s history—positive and negative—
with the Church/religion.
Marriages of family members, particularly parents:




Parents’ ways of dealing with conflict.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

66 of 158




Parents’ styles of child-rearing.
Family tolerance of children’s sexual orientation or gender identity.

Session Two: Learning from the Past, Part 1
This session provides a time for one member of the couple to speak and for the other to listen. Session Two
opens with prayer, then looks back to focus upon the relationship of one partner with his/her family of
origin, including exploring the marriage(s) of his/her parents and siblings and, if possible, grandparents and
close friends. This discussion includes what the individual would or would not replicate from the past in
his/her own ongoing and future relationships, particularly the relationship that is to be blessed. In addition,
the individual can look at levels of acceptance of his/her relationship by his/her family and at other issues
from family of origin and childhood.
The guiding assumption underlying this analysis is that certain issues are replicated from generation to
generation, and that, once the issues are identified, individuals can choose to continue those patterns or
deliberately alter them. This session works most effectively if the conversation flows naturally, rather than
following a rigid interview, and if it includes the following important areas:
•

Family: number and birth order of siblings.

•

Money: its role and influence in the family.

•

Sex: attitudes in family of origin about monogamy, fidelity, and the role of sex in relationship.

•

Alcohol and drugs: their places within the family as children grew.

•

In-laws: relationship with in-laws and greater family.

•

Children:

•

 agreement or disagreement between parents about child-rearing.
 the individual’s feelings about being a child in his/her family.
Conflict: parents’ methods of arguing and disagreeing.

As the conversation concludes, the preparer invites the individual to identify what he/she would or would
not replicate in his/her own adult relationship with the life partner. Following that, the silent partner is given
the floor to comment on what he/she has heard and learned, especially any surprises.

Session Three: Learning from the Past, Part 2
This session continues the look back by extending the chance for the other member of the couple to speak
about his/her family of origin. Both members of the couple need the opportunity to explore the topics and to
hear each other’s stories so that each can learn and appreciate more deeply what the other brings to their
relationship.
Session Three, which also begins with prayer, duplicates with the second person the process with the first
from Session Two. If time permits at the end, the couple might discuss the impact of family history on their
own relationship.

Session Four: Looking to the Future
This session, an opportunity to look at the relationship today and into the future, invites the couple to name
areas in the relationship that appear strong and supportive while also opening a space to identify and
address areas that may be problematic. Thoughts, questions, and new information from previous sessions
may help determine where the couple is today and where their relationship and household may need
attention in the future.
After opening with prayer, this session should include discussion of:
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

67 of 158

•

The couple’s relationship in general: in-depth exploration of where they have been and where
they are now.

•

The role of sex and intimacy in the relationship (for example, potential changes of sexual
behavior as a result of committing to a monogamous relationship).

•

The role of alcohol and drugs in the relationship.

•

Money (for example, household finances and financial planning).

•

Legal protections (for example, medical and financial durable powers-of-attorney, wills, living
wills, and insurance).

•

Household roles (for example, who takes out the trash, who keeps the social calendar).

•

Communication:

•

 How the couple talks things through.
 What happens when they disagree.
Concerns for the future.

•

Decision-making as a couple.

•

Dealing with families as individuals (one’s own as well as one’s partner’s) and as a couple.

•

Support networks, now and in the future.

Session Four concludes with a discussion of the need for boundaries between generations so that the
couples’ life as a unit may be seen as distinct from older and younger generations.

Session Five: Liturgical Decisions and Wrap-up
Session Five, focused on the marriage or blessing service itself, is an opportunity to make choices for the
liturgy, based on the Theological Reflection on Covenantal Relationship handed out (and discussed) at the first
session. The depth of this discussion will be determined by what was or was not addressed in Session One. In
addition, as the final session, Session Five serves as a time to consider questions that may have arisen from
previous sessions.

Outline of Session Five
•

Pray together.

•

Address questions and concerns regarding previous sessions and other issues that have arisen.

•

Review theological reflections in light of previous sessions and what is to come. The preparer can
help the couple connect the spiritual practices of their life as a couple and the “staging  of the
service. For example, will they process into the service together or separately, or will they be
already in the worship space as the liturgy begins? Will they sit together during the Ministry of
the Word or across the aisle from one another?

•

Discuss details of the service itself:




Scripture (which passages speak particularly to the couple’s life together) and whether nonbiblical readings may be included.
Will the liturgy take place at the congregation’s principal weekly celebration? Is celebration
of the eucharist to be omitted for pastoral reasons?
Other liturgical choices, especially:
• Which collect will be used?
• Which of the two vows will be used?
• Will rings be exchanged, or, if rings have already been worn, are they to be blessed?

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

68 of 158

What music, if any, will be included? (The couple should consult with the
congregation’s musician.)
Discuss presenters and their roles in supporting the couple in the service and in their ongoing
life.
•

•

In closing, the preparer can assure the couple that they have done hard and important work together, work
that is a gift both to the preparer and to the couple. The preparer can express his/her eager anticipation of
the couple’s marriage/blessing and of meeting their close and extended families, seeing them with their
friends, and celebrating their relationship in the sight of God.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

69 of 158

Handouts for
“Hearing, Seeing, and Declaring New Things 

Contents
1. Theological Reflection on Covenantal Relationship:
Spiritual Practice for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
2. Declaration of Intention for Marriage
3. Declaration of Intention for Lifelong Covenant
4. About Presenters—For the Couple
5. Information for Presenters
6. Model Congregational Guidelines
The Declaration of Intention requires the replacement of N.N. and N. N. in the first sentence with the couple’s
names.
Handouts 4 and 5 are designed for use with the liturgies “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong
Covenant  and “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Marriage.  The preparer should insert the correct title of
the rite. These handouts may be modified if one of the other marriage liturgies is to be used.
Handouts 4 through 6 are samples that may be adapted for the use of a specific congregation. In these, “N.
Episcopal Church  should be replaced with the congregation’s name, and a similar change made for
“Episcopal Diocese of X. 

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

70 of 158

Handout 1

Theological Reflection on Covenantal Relationship:
Spiritual Practice for Gender and Sexual Minority Couples
Christian Life and Covenants
All Christians are called to bear witness to the good news of God’s love and grace in Jesus Christ, through the
power of the Holy Spirit. We are empowered for such witness by our covenantal relationship with God.
Baptism initiates us into that covenant, making us Christ’s own forever and members of Christ’s Body, the
Church. The eucharist sustains us in that covenantal life and strengthens us to be Christ’s witnesses in the
world.
Our covenantal life with God is expressed in relationships of commitment and faithfulness, including those of
gender and sexual minority couples. It is the Church’s joy to celebrate these relationships as signs of God’s
love, to pray for God’s grace to support couples in their life together, and to join with these couples in our
shared witness to the gospel in the world.

Themes for Theological Reflection and Spiritual Practice
A sacramental framework for covenantal relationships offers a way to reflect on the grace of Christ and the
fruit of the Spirit in the lives of faithful, committed couples. Several theological themes can assist couples as
they consider their covenantal vows as a form of spiritual practice:
•

Vocation: God calls people into various kinds of relationship, whether as single people, in
monastic communities, or as intimate couples. These vocational callings can empower our
witness to the gospel. The decision to enter into a marriage or covenantal union is a vocation
marked by these characteristics: “fidelity, monogamy, mutual affection and respect, careful,
honest communication, and the holy love which enables those in such relationships to see in
each other the image of God. 

•

Households: Covenantal relationships are often lived in households in which we practice daily the
giving of ourselves for the good of another. While households take many different forms, they
create a space of mutual trust and accountability. The joy, intimacy, and shared vulnerability of
households can thus help us learn the spiritual disciplines of compassion, forgiveness, and
reconciliation in lives of committed monogamy and fidelity.

•

Fruitfulness: The divine grace that sustains a covenantal relationship bears fruit in countless
ways, not only for the couple but for the wider community as well. Covenanted couples manifest
this grace in their shared gifts for ministry and in lives of service, generosity, and hospitality.

•

Mutual Blessing: A blessed relationship is set apart for a divine purpose: to bear witness to the
creating, redeeming, and sanctifying love of God in the world. As the Spirit empowers the couple
for this witness, the Church is likewise blessed and strengthened for its mission and ministry.

In all of these ways and more, the blessing of a relationship invites the couple and the whole Church to
renew our commitment to the Baptismal Covenant. That commitment is expressed by faith in the good news
of Jesus Christ, in the hope for union with God that Christ promised, and with the love that knits us together
as the Body of Christ. As the apostle Paul says, we live our life together as God’s people with faith, hope, and
love. And the greatest of these is love (1 Corinthians 13:13).

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

71 of 158

Handout 2

Declaration of Intention for Marriage
NOTE: Canon I.18.4 requires couples to sign this Declaration of Intention prior to the solemnization of
their marriage.

We understand the teaching of the Church that God’s purpose for our marriage is for our mutual joy, for the
help and comfort we will give to each other in prosperity and adversity, and, when it is God’s will, for the gift
and heritage of children and their nurture in the knowledge and love of God. We also understand that our
marriage is to be unconditional, mutual, exclusive, faithful, and lifelong; and we engage to make the utmost
effort to accept these gifts and fulfill these duties, with the help of God and the support of our community.

Signature

Signature

Date

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

72 of 158

Handout 3

Declaration of Intention for Lifelong Covenant

NOTE: This template is presented for use with gender and sexual minority couples preparing
for The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant, since a similar declaration is required
by the Canons of the Episcopal Church (Canon I.18.4) prior to the solemnization of a
marriage.

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
We, N.N. and N.N., desiring to receive the blessing of a Lifelong Covenant, do solemnly declare that we hold
this covenant to be our lifelong commitment as provided by The Episcopal Church gathered in General
Convention.
We believe that our covenant is intended by God for our mutual joy, for the encouragement and support
given one another in daily life and changing circumstances, for bringing God’s grace to our community, for
the deepening of faith as we experience God’s love in our love for one another, and (if it may be) for the
physical and spiritual nurture of children. This covenant shall be nurtured and characterized by fidelity,
monogamy, mutual affection and respect, careful, honest communication, and the holy love which shall
enable us to see in each other the image of God.
And we do engage ourselves, so far as in us lies, to make our utmost effort to establish this covenant and to
seek God’s help hereto.

Signature

Signature

Date

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

73 of 158

Sample Handout 4

About Presenters—For the Couple
At N. Episcopal Church, we consider “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant  [“The Witnessing
and Blessing of a Marriage ] to be a celebration supported by the congregation, much as candidates for
baptism are supported by all the members of the Church. Just as those who are baptized are initiated into
the full life of the Church, those who receive the Church’s blessing upon their relationship are embraced in a
new way in the faith community.

The Blessing Liturgy [The Marriage]
The presentation takes place immediately after the sermon, as follows:
The couple comes before the assembly. If there is to be a presentation, the presenters stand with the
couple, and the Presider says to them
Presider
Presenters
Presider
Presenters

Who presents N. and N., as they seek the blessing of God and the Church on
their love and life together?
We do.
Will you love, respect, and pray for N. and N., and do all in your power to
stand with them in the life they will share?
We will.

Choosing Presenters
There are a variety of possibilities for choosing presenters who will stand with you and present you at the
liturgy. It can be helpful to choose at least one member of this faith community to walk with you through
this process. If you are new to the congregation, the priest (or other person designated) can help you
discern whom you might consider. The selection of a couple mature in their relationship can be particularly
helpful if you are just beginning your life together. Often, couples will choose their own parents, children, or
other supportive family members to be their presenters.
Presenters can pray for you during the period of preparation before your blessing [marriage], keep you
connected to the congregation, and continue to support you in your ongoing covenanted life together.
Finally, in choosing, remember that these people will stand with you during the liturgy and present you at
this rite. Also remember that, immediately after you are presented, the entire congregation will vow to
support you as you, in turn, become a blessing and bear grace to the entire congregation.
Because presenters serve an important role before and after the blessing [marriage], you and your
clergyperson should talk early about selecting presenters, so that your prayerful partnership may begin as
soon as possible.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

74 of 158

Sample Handout 5

Information for Presenters
At N. Episcopal Church, we consider “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant  [“The Witnessing
and Blessing of a Marriage ] to be a celebration supported by the congregation, much as candidates for
baptism are supported by all the members of the Church. Just as those who are baptized are initiated into
the full life of the Church, those who receive the Church’s blessing upon their relationship are embraced in a
new way in the faith community.
At the blessing service [marriage], you present the couple to the presider and to the assembly, as follows:
The couple comes before the assembly. If there is to be a presentation, the presenters stand with the
couple, and the Presider says to them
Presider
Presenters
Presider
Presenters

Who presents N. and N., as they seek the blessing of God and the Church on
their love and life together?
We do.
Will you love, respect, and pray for N. and N., and do all in your power to
stand with them in the life they will share?
We will.

As a presenter, your role begins even before the blessing [marriage]. We encourage you to pray for the
couple both privately and in the Prayers of the People at Sunday services during their period of preparation.
You can continue to support their ongoing life by acknowledging the anniversary of their blessing [marriage]
and offering your presence whenever their household experiences times of difficulty or celebrates occasions
of joy. If you are a member of the congregation, you also have a role in keeping them connected to others in
the congregation.
As a presenter, you promise to support the couple as they become a blessing and bear grace to their families
and friends, the Church, and the world. In this role, then, you are a witness to the blessing given and received
in the liturgy and carried forth by the couple into the world.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

75 of 158

Sample Handout 6

Model Congregational Guidelines
NOTE: Most congregations adopt some form of marriage policy expressing norms and
guidelines for different-sex/gender couples preparing for marriage. All congregations may
engage in a helpful and fruitful exercise to develop guidelines that reflect the Christian
community in which they worship; the guidelines that are developed should apply to both
different-sex/gender couples and gender and sexual minority couples. Obviously, such a
policy is optional at the discretion of the clergy in consultation with the vestry or bishop’s
committee. As always with liturgical matters, final decisions are the responsibility of the
clergy. Following is a model of a guideline that applies for all couples preparing for marriage
or a blessing. It may be modified to meet specific situations and needs.

Information for All Couples Seeking the Church’s Blessing at N. Episcopal Church
A. Introduction
The Christian community at N. Episcopal Church understands that relationships are complex and that making
a lifelong commitment to a relationship through a marriage or blessing is a significant, exciting, and wonderfilled event in people’s lives. We also believe that a Christian community that agrees to bless such a
relationship needs to be intentional about supporting the couple as they prepare for the blessing and as they
live out their lives.
We understand that committed, lifelong relationships, whether for gender and sexual minority couples or
different-sex/gender couples, are to be outward and visible signs of an inward, spiritual, and God-given love.
In this context, N. Episcopal Church seeks to support all couples in their commitment to one another and to
help make the love of God more visible for the whole community.

B. Guidelines
The following guidelines have been adopted by the lay and ordained leaders of N. Episcopal Church:
1. As required for different-sex/gender couples seeking marriage according to the Book of
Common Prayer, at least one member of a gender and sexual minority couple must be
baptized.
2. It is desirable that at least one member of the couple be an active member of this, or some
other, Christian community. We hope this membership might include giving serious, prayerful
consideration to supporting the congregation through time, talent, and/or treasure.
3. Approximately six months’ notice should be given to allow for planning and pastoral
preparation.
4. If the couple has no connection with N. Episcopal Church but wishes to have the marriage
or blessing at N. Episcopal Church or to use the services of N. Episcopal Church’s priest:
•
•

They should be able to show that at least one of the couple has active membership in
another Episcopal or Christian congregation.
They need to complete marriage or blessing preparation with their own or other
clergyperson or a qualified lay preparer.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

76 of 158

•

They might consider making a financial contribution to N. Episcopal Church in thanksgiving
for their marriage or blessing and for the ongoing support of the Church, its ministry and
mission. A creative formula to calculate this contribution might be to consider a tithe (10
percent) of the budget for the entire celebration. (Clergy have discretion here, as resources
vary greatly from couple to couple. Also, if a couple is returning to Church for the first time,
an unconditional welcome may be the best pastoral response.)

In all cases, it is important that all concerned comply with the laws of the State, the Canons of the Episcopal
Church, and the canons and policies of the Episcopal Diocese of X, as well as the directives of the diocesan
bishop, including compliance with diocesan policies for cases in which the relationship is not the first
marriage or committed relationship for one or both people.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

77 of 158

V. LITURGICAL RESOURCES
for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships

Contents
1. The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant
2. The Witnessing and Blessing of a Marriage
3. The Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage (2)
a. The Blessing of a Civil Marriage
b. An Order for Marriage
4. The Form of Solemnization of Matrimony

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

78 of 158

1. The Witnessing and Blessing
of a Lifelong Covenant
Concerning the Service

This rite is appropriately celebrated in the context of the Holy Eucharist and may take place at the principal
Sunday Liturgy. This rite then replaces the Ministry of the Word. A bishop or priest normally presides. Parallel
texts from Enriching Our Worship 1 are included as options for elements of this rite.
At least one of the couple must be a baptized Christian.
Two or more presenters, who may be friends, parents, family members, or drawn from the local assembly,
may present the couple to the presider and the assembly.
As indicated in the opening address, the consent, and the blessing of the rings, the rite may be modified for
use with a couple who have previously made a lifelong commitment to one another.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

79 of 158

The Witnessing and Blessing
of a Lifelong Covenant
The Word of God
Gathering
The couple to be blessed joins the assembly.
A hymn of praise, psalm, or anthem may be sung, or instrumental music may be played.
The Presider says the following, the People standing
Presider
People

Blessed be God: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Blessed be God, now and for ever. Amen.

In place of the above may be said
Presider
People

Blessed be the one, holy, and living God.
Glory to God for ever and ever.

From Easter Day through the Day of Pentecost
Presider
People

Alleluia. Christ is risen.
The Lord is risen indeed. Alleluia.

In place of the above may be said
Presider
People

Alleluia. Christ is risen.
Christ is risen indeed. Alleluia.

Then may be said
Presider
People
Presider
People
Presider
People

Beloved, let us love one another,
For love is of God.
Whoever does not love does not know God,
For God is love.
Since God so loves us,
Let us love one another.

The Presider may address the assembly in these words

Dear friends in Christ,
or
Dearly beloved,
in the name of God and the Church
we have come together today with N.N. and N.N.,

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

80 of 158

to witness the vows they make,
committing themselves to one another.
Forsaking all others,
they will bind themselves to one another
in a covenant of mutual fidelity and steadfast love,
remaining true to one another in heart, body, and mind,
as long as they both shall live.
Such a lifelong commitment
is not to be entered into lightly or thoughtlessly,
but responsibly and with reverence.
Let us pray, then, that God will give them the strength
to remain steadfast in what they vow this day.
Let us also pray for the generosity to support them
in the commitment they undertake,
and for the wisdom to see God at work in their life together.
Or this, for those who have previously made a lifelong commitment to one another

Dear friends in Christ [or Dearly beloved],
in the name of God and the Church,
we have come together with N.N. and N.N.,
to witness the sacred vows they make
as they solemnize [or reaffirm] their commitment to one another.
Today they renew their covenant of mutual fidelity and steadfast love,
forsaking all others and remaining true to one another in heart, body, and mind,
as long as they both shall live.
Let us pray, then, that God will give them the strength
to remain steadfast in what they vow this day.
Let us also pray for the generosity
to support them in the commitment they undertake,
and for the wisdom to see God at work in their life together.

The Collect of the Day
The Lord be with you.
And also with you.
Let us pray.

Presider
People
Presider

or

God be with you.

The Presider says one of the following Collects

God of abundance:
assist by your grace N. and N.,
whose covenant of love and fidelity we witness this day.
Grant them your protection, that with firm resolve
they may honor and keep the vows they make;
through Jesus Christ our Savior,
who lives and reigns with you in the unity of the Holy Spirit,
one God, for ever and ever. Amen.
or this

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

81 of 158

Almighty and everliving God:
look tenderly upon N. and N.,
who stand before you in the company of your Church.
Let their life together bring them great joy.
Grant them so to love selflessly and live humbly,
that they may be to one another and to the world
a witness and a sign of your never-failing love and care;
through Jesus Christ your Son our Lord,
who lives and reigns with you and the Holy Spirit,
one God, to the ages of ages. Amen.
or this

O God, faithful and true,
whose steadfast love endures for ever:
we give you thanks for sustaining N. and N. in the life they share
and for bringing them to this day.
Nurture them and fill them with joy in their life together,
continuing the good work you have begun in them;
and grant us, with them, a dwelling place eternal in the heavens
where all your people will share the joy of perfect love,
and where you, with the Son and the Holy Spirit, live and reign,
one God, now and for ever. Amen.
or this, for those who bring children

Holy Trinity, one God,
three Persons perfect in unity and equal in majesty:
Draw together with bonds of love and affection
N. and N., who with their families
seek to live in harmony and forbearance all their days,
that their joining together will be to us
a reflection of that perfect communion
which is your very essence and life,
O Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
who live and reign in glory everlasting. Amen.

The Lessons
The people sit. Then one or more of the following passages of Scripture is read. If the Holy Communion is to be celebrated, a
passage from the Gospels always concludes the Readings. When the blessing is celebrated in the context of the Sunday
Eucharist, the Readings of the Sunday are used, except with the permission of the Bishop.
Ruth 1:16–17
1 Samuel 18:1b, 3; 20:16–17; 42a;
or 1 Samuel 18:1–4

Ecclesiastes 4:9–12
Song of Solomon 2:10–13; 8:6–7
Micah 4:1–4

Romans 12:9–18
1 Corinthians 12:31b–13:13
2 Corinthians 5:17–20
Galatians 5:14, 22–26

Ephesians 3:14–21
Colossians 3:12–17
1 John 3:18–24
1 John 4:7–16, 21

When a biblical passage other than one from the Gospels is to be read, the Reader announces it with these words
Reader

A Reading from

.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

82 of 158

After the Reading, the Reader may say
or
or

The Word of the Lord.
Hear what the Spirit is saying to God’s people.
Hear what the Spirit is saying to the Churches.
Thanks be to God.

People

Between the Readings, a psalm, hymn, or anthem may be sung or said. Appropriate psalms are Psalm 65, Psalm 67, Psalm
85:7–13, Psalm 98, Psalm 100, Psalm 126, Psalm 127, Psalm 133, Psalm 148, and Psalm 149:1–5.
Appropriate passages from the Gospels are
Matthew 5:1–16
Mark 12:28–34
Luke 6:32–38

John 15:9–17
John 17:1–2, 18–26

All standing, the Deacon or Priest reads the Gospel, first saying
or
People

The Holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ according to
The Holy Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ according to

.
.

Glory to you, Lord Christ.

After the Gospel, the Reader says
People

The Gospel of the Lord.
Praise to you, Lord Christ.

The Sermon

The Witnessing of the Vows and the Blessing of the Covenant
The couple comes before the assembly. If there is to be a presentation, the presenters stand with the couple, and the
Presider says to them
Presider
Presenters
Presider
Presenters

Who presents N. and N., as they seek the blessing of God and the Church on their love and life
together?
We do.
Will you love, respect, and pray for N. and N., and do all in your power to stand with them in
the life they will share?
We will.

The Presider then addresses the couple, saying

N. and N., you have come before God and the Church to exchange [and renew] solemn vows
with one another and to ask God’s blessing.
The Presider addresses one member of the couple, saying
Presider
Answer
Presider
Answer

N., do you freely and unreservedly offer yourself to N.?
I do.
Will you [continue to] live together in faithfulness and holiness of life as long as you both shall
live?
I will, with God’s help.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

83 of 158

The Presider addresses the other member of the couple, saying
Presider
Answer
Presider
Answer

N., do you freely and unreservedly offer yourself to N.?
I do.
Will you [continue to] live together in faithfulness and holiness of life as long as you both shall
live?
I will, with God’s help.

The assembly stands, the couple faces the People, and the Presider addresses them, saying
Presider
People
Presider
People

Will all of you gathered to witness these vows do all in your power to uphold and honor this
couple in the covenant they make?
We will.
Will you pray for them, especially in times of trouble, and celebrate with them in times of joy?
We will.

The Prayers
The Presider then introduces the prayers
Presider

Then let us pray for N. and N. in their life together and for the concerns of this community.

A Deacon or another leader bids prayers for the couple.
Prayers for the Church and for the world, for the concerns of the local community, for those who suffer or face trouble, and
for the departed are also appropriate. If the rite takes place in the principal Sunday worship of the congregation, the rubric
concerning the Prayers of the People on page 359 of the Book of Common Prayer is followed.
Adaptations or insertions may be made to the form that follows.
A bar in the margin indicates a bidding that may be omitted.
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader

People
Leader

People

For N. and N., seeking your blessing and the blessing of your holy people;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For a spirit of loving-kindness to shelter them all their days;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For friends to support them and communities to enfold them;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For peace in their home and love in their family;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For the grace and wisdom to care for the children you entrust to them [or may entrust to
them];
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For the honesty to acknowledge when they hurt each other, and the humility to seek each
other’s forgiveness and yours;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

84 of 158

Leader
People
Leader
People

For the outpouring of your love through their work and witness;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For the strength to keep the vows each of us has made;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.

The leader may add one or more of the following biddings
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader

People

For all who have been reborn and made new in the waters of Baptism;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For those who lead and serve in communities of faith;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For those who seek justice, peace, and concord among nations;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For those who are sick or suffering, homeless or poor;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For victims of violence and those who inflict it;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For communion with all who have died, [especially those whom we remember
this day:
];
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.

The Presider concludes the Prayers with the following or another appropriate Collect

Giver of every gift, source of all goodness,
hear the prayers we bring before you for N. and N.,
who seek your blessing this day.
Strengthen them as they share in the saving work of Jesus,
and bring about for them and for all you have created
the fullness of life he promised,
who now lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.
If the Eucharist is to follow, the Lord’s Prayer is omitted here.
Leader

People
and Leader

As our Savior Christ
has taught us,
we now pray,

And now, as our Savior
Christ has taught us,
we are bold to say,

Our Father in heaven,
hallowed be your Name,

Our Father, who art in heaven,
hallowed be thy Name,

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

85 of 158

your kingdom come,
your will be done,
on earth as in heaven.
Give us today our daily bread.
Forgive us our sins
as we forgive those
who sin against us.
Save us from the time of trial,
and deliver us from evil.
For the kingdom, the power,
and the glory are yours,
now and for ever. Amen.

thy kingdom come,
thy will be done,
on earth as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses,
as we forgive those
who trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil.
For thine is the kingdom,
and the power, and the glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.

The Commitment
The People sit. The couple stands, facing the Presider.

N. and N., I invite you now, illumined by the Word of God and strengthened by the prayer of
this community, to make your covenant before God and the Church.

Presider

Each member of the couple, in turn, takes the right hand of the other and says

In the name of God,
I, N., give myself to you, N., and take you to myself
I will support and care for you by the grace of God:
in times of sickness, in times of health.
I will hold and cherish you in the love of Christ:
in times of plenty, in times of want.
I will honor and keep you with the Spirit’s help:
in times of anguish, in times of joy,
forsaking all others, as long as we both shall live.
This is my solemn vow.
or this

In the name of God,
I, N., give myself to you, N., and take you to myself
I will support and care for you:
in times of sickness, in times of health.
I will hold and cherish you:
in times of plenty, in times of want.
I will honor and love you:
in times of anguish, in times of joy,
forsaking all others, as long as we both shall live.
This is my solemn vow.
If rings are to be exchanged, they are brought before the Presider, who prays using the following words

Let us pray.
Bless, O God, these rings
as signs of the enduring covenant
N. and N. have made with each other,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

86 of 158

The two people place the rings on the fingers of one another, first the one, then the other, saying

N., I give you this ring as a symbol of my vow,
and with all that I am, and all that I have, I honor you,
in the name of God.
or
in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit.
If the two have previously given and worn rings as a symbol of their commitment, the rings may be blessed on the hands of
the couple, the Presider saying

Let us pray.
By the rings which they have worn, faithful God,
N. and N. have shown to one another and the world
their love and faithfulness.
Bless now these rings,
that from this day forward
they may be signs of the vows N. and N. have exchanged
in your presence and in the communion of your Church,
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Pronouncement
The Presider joins the right hands and says

Now that N. and N. have exchanged vows of love and fidelity
in the presence of God and the Church,
I now pronounce that they are bound to one another
as long as they both shall live. Amen.

Blessing of the Couple
As the couple stands or kneels, the Presider invokes God’s blessing upon them, saying

Let us pray.
Most gracious God,
we praise you for the tender mercy and unfailing care
revealed to us in Jesus the Christ
and for the great joy and comfort bestowed upon us
in the gift of human love.
We give you thanks for N. and N.,
and the covenant of faithfulness they have made.
Pour out the abundance of your Holy Spirit upon them.
Keep them in your steadfast love;
protect them from all danger;
fill them with your wisdom and peace;
lead them in holy service to each other and the world.
The Presider continues with one of the following

God the Father,
God the Son,
God the Holy Spirit,
bless, preserve, and keep you,
and mercifully grant you rich and boundless grace,

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

87 of 158

that you may please God in body and soul.
God make you a sign of the loving-kindness and steadfast fidelity
manifest in the life, death, and resurrection of our Savior,
and bring you at last to the delight of the heavenly banquet,
where he lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.
or this

God, the holy and undivided Trinity,
bless, preserve, and keep you,
and mercifully grant you rich and boundless grace,
that you may please God in body and soul.
God make you a sign of the loving-kindness and steadfast fidelity
manifest in the life, death, and resurrection of our Savior,
and bring you at last to the delight of the heavenly banquet,
where he lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.

The Peace
The Presider bids the Peace.
Presider
People

The peace of the Lord be always with you.
And also with you.

In place of the above may be said
Presider
People

The peace of Christ be always with you.
And also with you.

The liturgy continues with the Holy Communion. When the Eucharist is not celebrated, the Presider blesses the people. The
Deacon, or in the absence of a Deacon, the Priest, dismisses them.

At the Eucharist
The liturgy continues with the Offertory, at which the couple may present the offerings of bread and wine.
The following proper preface may be said.

Because in the giving of two people to each other in faithful love
you reveal the joy and abundant life you share
with your Son Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit.
The following postcommunion prayer may be said.

God our strength and joy,
we thank you for the communion of our life together,
for the example of holy love that you give us in N. and N.,
and for the Sacrament of the Body and Blood
of our Savior Jesus Christ.
Grant that it may renew our hope
and nourish us for the work you set before us
to witness to the presence of Christ in the world,
through the power of your Spirit,
and to the glory of your Name. Amen.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

88 of 158

2. The Witnessing and Blessing
of a Marriage
Concerning the Service

This rite is appropriately celebrated in the context of the Holy Eucharist and may take place at the principal
Sunday Liturgy. This rite then replaces the Ministry of the Word. A bishop or priest normally presides. Parallel
texts from Enriching Our Worship 1 are included as options for elements of this rite.
At least one of the couple must be a baptized Christian, and the marriage shall conform to the laws of the
state and canons of this church.
Two or more presenters, who may be friends, parents, family members, or drawn from the local assembly,
may present the couple to the presider and the assembly.
As indicated in the opening address, the consent, and the blessing of the rings, the rite may be modified for
use with a couple who have previously made a lifelong commitment to one another.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

89 of 158

The Witnessing and Blessing
of a Marriage
The Word of God
Gathering
The couple joins the assembly.
A hymn of praise, psalm, or anthem may be sung, or instrumental music may be played.
The Presider says the following, the People standing
Presider
People

Blessed be God: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Blessed be God, now and for ever. Amen.

In place of the above may be said
Presider
People

Blessed be the one, holy, and living God.
Glory to God for ever and ever.

From Easter Day through the Day of Pentecost
Presider
People

Alleluia. Christ is risen.
The Lord is risen indeed. Alleluia.

In place of the above may be said
Presider
People

Alleluia. Christ is risen.
Christ is risen indeed. Alleluia.

Then may be said
Presider
People
Presider
People
Presider
People

Beloved, let us love one another,
For love is of God.
Whoever does not love does not know God,
For God is love.
Since God so loves us,
Let us love one another.

The Presider may address the assembly in these words

Dear friends in Christ,
or
Dearly beloved,
in the name of God and the Church
we have come together today with N.N. and N.N.,
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

90 of 158

to witness the vows they make,
committing themselves to one another
in marriage [according to the laws of the state or civil jurisdiction of X.]
Forsaking all others,
they will bind themselves to one another
in a covenant of mutual fidelity and steadfast love,
remaining true to one another in heart, body, and mind,
as long as they both shall live.
The lifelong commitment of marriage
is not to be entered into lightly or thoughtlessly,
but responsibly and with reverence.
Let us pray, then, that God will give them the strength
to remain steadfast in what they vow this day.
Let us also pray for the generosity
to support them in the commitment they undertake
and for the wisdom to see God at work in their life together.
Or this, for those who have previously made a lifelong commitment to one another

Dear friends in Christ,
or
Dearly beloved,
in the name of God and the Church
we have come together today with N.N. and N.N.
to witness the sacred vows they make this day
as they are married
[according to the laws of the state or civil jurisdiction of X.],
and reaffirm their commitment to one another.
Forsaking all others,
they will renew their covenant of mutual fidelity and steadfast love,
remaining true to one another in heart, body, and mind,
as long as they both shall live.
Let us pray, then, that God will give them the strength
to remain steadfast in what they vow this day.
Let us also pray for the generosity
to support them in the commitment they undertake,
and for the wisdom to see God at work in their life together.

The Collect of the Day
Presider
People
Presider

The Lord be with you.
And also with you.
Let us pray.

or

God be with you.

The Presider says one of the following Collects

God of abundance:
assist by your grace N. and N.,
whose covenant of love and fidelity we witness this day.
Grant them your protection, that with firm resolve
they may honor and keep the vows they make;
through Jesus Christ our Savior,
who lives and reigns with you in the unity of the Holy Spirit,
one God, for ever and ever. Amen.
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

91 of 158

or this

Almighty and everliving God:
look tenderly upon N. and N.,
who stand before you in the company of your Church.
Let their life together bring them great joy.
Grant them so to love selflessly and live humbly,
that they may be to one another and to the world
a witness and a sign of your never-failing love and care;
through Jesus Christ your Son our Lord,
who lives and reigns with you and the Holy Spirit,
one God, to the ages of ages. Amen.
or this

O God, faithful and true,
whose steadfast love endures for ever:
we give you thanks for sustaining N. and N. in the life they share
and for bringing them to this day.
Nurture them and fill them with joy in their life together,
continuing the good work you have begun in them;
and grant us, with them, a dwelling place eternal in the heavens
where all your people will share the joy of perfect love,
and where you, with the Son and the Holy Spirit, live and reign,
one God, now and for ever. Amen.
or this, for those who bring children

Holy Trinity, one God,
three Persons perfect in unity and equal in majesty:
Draw together with bonds of love and affection
N. and N., who with their families
seek to live in harmony and forbearance all their days,
that their joining together will be to us
a reflection of that perfect communion
which is your very essence and life,
O Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
who live and reign in glory everlasting. Amen.

The Lessons
The people sit. Then one or more of the following passages of Scripture is read. If the Holy Communion is to be celebrated, a
passage from the Gospels always concludes the Readings. When the blessing is celebrated in the context of the Sunday
Eucharist, the Readings of the Sunday are used, except with the permission of the Bishop.
Ruth 1:16–17
1 Samuel 18:1b, 3; 20:16–17; 42a;
or 1 Samuel 18:1–4

Ecclesiastes 4:9–12
Song of Solomon 2:10–13; 8:6–7
Micah 4:1–4

Romans 12:9–18
1 Corinthians 12:31b–13:13
2 Corinthians 5:17–20
Galatians 5:14, 22–26

Ephesians 3:14–21
Colossians 3:12–17
1 John 3:18–24
1 John 4:7–16, 21

When a biblical passage other than one from the Gospels is to be read, the Reader announces it with these words
Reader

A Reading from

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

.
92 of 158

After the Reading, the Reader may say
or
or

The Word of the Lord.
Hear what the Spirit is saying to God’s people.
Hear what the Spirit is saying to the Churches.
Thanks be to God.

People

Between the Readings, a psalm, hymn, or anthem may be sung or said. Appropriate psalms are Psalm 65, Psalm 67, Psalm
85:7–13, Psalm 98, Psalm 100, Psalm 126, Psalm 127, Psalm 133, Psalm 148, and Psalm 149:1–5.
Appropriate passages from the Gospels are
Matthew 5:1–16
Mark 12:28–34
Luke 6:32–38

John 15:9–17
John 17:1–2, 18–26

All standing, the Deacon or Priest reads the Gospel, first saying
or
People

The Holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ according to
The Holy Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ according to

.
.

Glory to you, Lord Christ.

After the Gospel, the Reader says
People

The Gospel of the Lord.
Praise to you, Lord Christ.

The Sermon

The Witnessing of the Vows and the Blessing of the Covenant
The couple comes before the assembly. If there is to be a presentation, the presenters stand with the couple, and the
Presider says to them
Presider
Presenters
Presider
Presenters

Who presents N. and N., as they seek the blessing of God and the Church on their love and life
together?
We do.
Will you love, respect, and pray for N. and N., and do all in your power to stand with them in
the life they will share?
We will.

The Presider then addresses the couple, saying

N. and N., you have come before God and the Church to exchange and renew solemn vows
with one another and to ask God’s blessing.
The Presider addresses one member of the couple, saying
Presider
Answer
Presider
Answer

N., do you freely and unreservedly offer yourself to N.?
I do.
Will you continue to live together in faithfulness and holiness of life as long as you both shall
live?
I will, with God’s help.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

93 of 158

The Presider addresses the other member of the couple, saying
Presider
Answer
Presider
Answer

N., do you freely and unreservedly offer yourself to N.?
I do.
Will you continue to live together in faithfulness and holiness of life as long as you both shall
live?
I will, with God’s help.

The assembly stands, the couple faces the People, and the Presider addresses them, saying
Presider
Will all of you gathered to witness these vows do all in your power to uphold and honor this
People
Presider
People

couple in the covenant they make?
We will.
Will you pray for them, especially in times of trouble, and celebrate with them in times of joy?
We will.

The Prayers
The Presider then introduces the prayers
Presider

Then let us pray for N. and N. in their life together and for the concerns of this community.

A Deacon or another leader bids prayers for the couple.
Prayers for the Church and for the world, for the concerns of the local community, for those who suffer or face trouble, and
for the departed are also appropriate. If the rite takes place in the principal Sunday worship of the congregation, the rubric
concerning the Prayers of the People on page 359 of the Book of Common Prayer is followed.
Adaptations or insertions may be made to the form that follows.
A bar in the margin indicates a bidding that may be omitted.
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader

People
Leader

People

For N. and N., seeking your blessing and the blessing of your holy people;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For a spirit of loving-kindness to shelter them all their days;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For friends to support them and communities to enfold them;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For peace in their home and love in their family;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For the grace and wisdom to care for the children you entrust to them [or may entrust to
them];
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For the honesty to acknowledge when they hurt each other, and the humility to seek each
other’s forgiveness and yours;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

94 of 158

Leader
People
Leader
People

For the outpouring of your love through their work and witness;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For the strength to keep the vows each of us has made;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.

The leader may add one or more of the following biddings
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader
People
Leader

People

For all who have been reborn and made new in the waters of Baptism;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For those who lead and serve in communities of faith;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For those who seek justice, peace, and concord among nations;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For those who are sick or suffering, homeless or poor;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For victims of violence and those who inflict it;
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.
For communion with all who have died [especially those whom we remember
this day:
];
Loving God,
or
Lord, in your mercy,
Hear our prayer.

The Presider concludes the Prayers with the following or another appropriate Collect

Giver of every gift, source of all goodness,
hear the prayers we bring before you for N. and N.,
who seek your blessing this day.
Strengthen them as they share in the saving work of Jesus,
and bring about for them and for all you have created
the fullness of life he promised,
who now lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.
If the Eucharist is to follow, the Lord’s Prayer is omitted here.
Leader

People
and Leader

As our Savior Christ
has taught us,
we now pray,

And now, as our Savior
Christ has taught us,
we are bold to say,

Our Father in heaven,
hallowed be your Name,

Our Father, who art in heaven,
hallowed be thy Name,

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

95 of 158

your kingdom come,
your will be done,
on earth as in heaven.
Give us today our daily bread.
Forgive us our sins
as we forgive those
who sin against us.
Save us from the time of trial,
and deliver us from evil.
For the kingdom, the power,
and the glory are yours,
now and for ever. Amen.

thy kingdom come,
thy will be done,
on earth as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses,
as we forgive those
who trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil.
For thine is the kingdom,
and the power, and the glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.

The Marriage
The People sit. The couple stands, facing the Presider.

N. and N., I invite you now, illumined by the Word of God and strengthened by the prayer of
this community, to make your covenant before God and the Church.

Presider

Each member of the couple, in turn, takes the hand of the other and says

In the name of God,
I, N., give myself to you, N., and take you to myself.
I will support and care for you by the grace of God:
in times of sickness, in times of health.
I will hold and cherish you in the love of Christ:
in times of plenty, in times of want.
I will honor and love you with the Spirit’s help:
in times of anguish, in times of joy,
forsaking all others, as long as we both shall live.
This is my solemn vow.
or this

In the name of God,
I, N., give myself to you, N., and take you to myself.
I will support and care for you:
in times of sickness, in times of health.
I will hold and cherish you:
in times of plenty, in times of want.
I will honor and love you:
in times of anguish, in times of joy,
forsaking all others, as long as we both shall live.
This is my solemn vow.
If rings are to be exchanged, they are brought before the Presider, who prays using the following words

Let us pray.
Bless, O God, these rings
as signs of the enduring covenant
N. and N. have made with each other,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

96 of 158

The two people place the rings on the fingers of one another, first the one, then the other, saying

N., I give you this ring as a symbol of my vow,
and with all that I am, and all that I have, I honor you,
in the name of God.
or
in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit.
If the two have previously given and worn rings as a symbol of their commitment, the rings may be blessed on the hands of
the couple, the Presider saying

Let us pray.
By the rings which they have worn, faithful God,
N. and N. have shown to one another and the world
their love and faithfulness.
Bless now these rings,
that from this day forward
they may be signs of the vows N. and N. have exchanged
in your presence and in the communion of your Church,
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Pronouncement
The Presider joins the right hands of the couple and says

Now that N. and N. have exchanged vows of love and fidelity
in the presence of God and the Church,
I pronounce that they are
married [according to the laws of the state or civil jurisdiction of X.]
and bound to one another
as long as they both shall live. Amen.

Blessing of the Couple
As the couple stands or kneels, the Presider invokes God’s blessing upon them, saying

Let us pray.
Most gracious God,
we praise you for the tender mercy and unfailing care
revealed to us in Jesus the Christ
and for the great joy and comfort bestowed upon us
in the gift of human love.
We give you thanks for N. and N.,
and the covenant of faithfulness they have made.
Pour out the abundance of your Holy Spirit upon them.
Keep them in your steadfast love;
protect them from all danger;
fill them with your wisdom and peace;
lead them in holy service to each other and the world.
The Presider continues with one of the following

God the Father,
God the Son,
God the Holy Spirit,
bless, preserve, and keep you,
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

97 of 158

and mercifully grant you rich and boundless grace,
that you may please God in body and soul.
God make you a sign of the loving-kindness and steadfast fidelity
manifest in the life, death, and resurrection of our Savior,
and bring you at last to the delight of the heavenly banquet,
where he lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.
or this

God, the holy and undivided Trinity,
bless, preserve, and keep you,
and mercifully grant you rich and boundless grace,
that you may please God in body and soul.
God make you a sign of the loving-kindness and steadfast fidelity
manifest in the life, death, and resurrection of our Savior,
and bring you at last to the delight of the heavenly banquet,
where he lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.

The Peace
The Presider bids the Peace.
Presider
People

The peace of the Lord be always with you.
And also with you.

In place of the above may be said
Presider
People

The peace of Christ be always with you.
And also with you.

The liturgy continues with the Holy Communion. When the Eucharist is not celebrated, the Presider blesses the people. The
Deacon, or in the absence of a Deacon, the Priest, dismisses them.

At the Eucharist
The liturgy continues with the Offertory, at which the couple may present the offerings of bread and wine.
The following proper preface may be said

Because in the giving of two people to each other in faithful love
you reveal the joy and abundant life you share
with your Son Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit.
The following postcommunion prayer may be said

God our strength and joy,
we thank you for the communion of our life together,
for the example of holy love that you give us in N. and N.,
and for the Sacrament of the Body and Blood
of our Savior Jesus Christ.
Grant that it may renew our hope
and nourish us for the work you set before us
to witness to the presence of Christ in the world,
through the power of your Spirit,
and to the glory of your Name. Amen.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

98 of 158

3. The Celebration and Blessing
of a Marriage (2)
Adapted from The Book of Common Prayer 1979

Concerning the Service

At least one of the parties must be a baptized Christian; the ceremony must be attested by at least two
witnesses; and the marriage must conform to the laws of the State.
A priest or a bishop normally presides at the Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage, because such ministers
alone have the function of pronouncing the nuptial blessing, and of celebrating the Holy Eucharist.
When both a bishop and a priest are present and officiating, the bishop should pronounce the blessing and
preside at the Eucharist.
A deacon, or an assisting priest, may deliver the charge, ask for the Declaration of Consent, read the Gospel,
and perform other assisting functions at the Eucharist.
Where it is permitted by civil law that deacons may perform marriages, and no priest or bishop is available, a
deacon may use the service which follows, omitting the nuptial blessing which follows The Prayers.
It is desirable that the Lessons from the Old Testament and the Epistles be read by lay persons.
In the opening exhortation (at the symbol of N.N.), the full names of the persons to be married are declared.
Subsequently, only their Christian names are used.
Additional Directions are on page 000.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

99 of 158

The Celebration and Blessing
of a Marriage (2)
At the time appointed, the persons to be married, with their witnesses, assemble in the church or some other appropriate
place.
During their entrance, a hymn, psalm, or anthem may be sung, or instrumental music may be played.
Then the Celebrant, facing the people and the persons to be married, addresses the congregation and says

Dearly beloved: We have come together in the presence of God to witness and bless the
joining together of N. and N. in Holy Matrimony. The joining of two people in a life of mutual
fidelity signifies to us the mystery of the union between Christ and his Church, and so it is
worthy of being honored among all people.
The union of two people in heart, body, and mind is intended by God for their mutual joy; for
the help and comfort given one another in prosperity and adversity; and, when it is God’s
will, for the gift of children and their nurture in the knowledge and love of the Lord.
Therefore marriage is not to be entered into unadvisedly or lightly, but reverently,
deliberately, and in accordance with the purposes for which it was instituted by God.
Into this holy union N.N. and N.N. now come to be joined.
If any of you can show just cause why they may not lawfully be married, speak now; or else
for ever hold your peace.
Then the Celebrant says to the persons to be married

I require and charge you both, here in the presence of God, that if either of you know any
reason why you may not be united in marriage lawfully, and in accordance with God’s Word,
you do now confess it.

The Declaration of Consent
The Celebrant says to one member of the couple, then to the other

Answer

N., will you have this woman/man/person to be your wife/husband/spouse; to live together in
the covenant of marriage? Will you love her/him, comfort her/him, honor and keep her/him, in
sickness and in health; and, forsaking all others, be faithful to her/him as long as you both
shall live?
I will.

The Celebrant then addresses the congregation, saying

People

Will all of you witnessing these promises do all in your power to uphold these two persons in
their marriage?
We will.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

100 of 158

If there is to be a presentation or a giving in marriage, it takes place at this time.
See Additional Directions, p. 000.
A hymn, psalm, or anthem may follow.

The Ministry of the Word
The Celebrant then says to the people
People
Celebrant

The Lord be with you.
And also with you.
Let us pray.
O gracious and everliving God, you have created humankind in your image: Look mercifully
upon N. and N. who come to you seeking your blessing, and assist them with your grace, that
with true fidelity and steadfast love they may honor and keep the promises and vows they
make; through Jesus Christ our Savior, who lives and reigns with you in the unity of the Holy
Spirit, one God, for ever and ever. Amen.

Then one or more of the following passages from Holy Scripture is read. Other readings from Scripture suitable for the
occasion may be used. If there is to be a Communion, a passage from the Gospel always concludes the Readings.
Genesis 1:26–28 (Male and female he created them)
Song of Solomon 2:10–13; 8:6–7 (Many waters cannot quench love)
Tobit 8:5b–8 (New English Bible) (That she and I may grow old together)
1 Corinthians 13:1–13 (Love is patient and kind)
Ephesians 3:14–19 (The Father from whom every family is named)
Ephesians 5:1–2 (Walk in love, as Christ loved us)
Colossians 3:12–17 (Love which binds everything together in harmony)
1 John 4:7–16 (Let us love one another, for love is of God)
Between the Readings, a psalm, hymn, or anthem may be sung or said. Appropriate psalms are Psalm 67, Psalm 127, and
Psalm 128.
When a passage from the Gospel is to be read, all stand, and the Deacon or Minister appointed says
People

The Holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ according to
Glory to you, Lord Christ.

.

Matthew 5:1–10 (The Beatitudes)
Matthew 5:13–16 (You are the light ... Let your light so shine)
Matthew 7:21, 24–29 (Like a wise man who built his house upon the rock)
John 15:9–12 (Love one another as I have loved you)
After the Gospel, the Reader says
People

The Gospel of the Lord.
Praise to you, Lord Christ.

A homily or other response to the Readings may follow.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

101 of 158

The Marriage
Each member of the couple, in turn, takes the right hand of the other and says

In the Name of God, I, N., take you, N., to be my wife/husband/spouse,
to have and to hold from this day forward,
for better for worse, for richer for poorer,
in sickness and in health, to love and to cherish,
until we are parted by death.
This is my solemn vow.
The Priest may ask God’s blessing on rings as follows

Bless, O Lord, these rings to be signs of the vows
by which N. and N. have bound themselves to each other;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The giver places the ring on the ring finger of the other’s hand and says

N., I give you this ring as a symbol of my vow,
and with all that I am, and all that I have, I honor you,
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit [or in the Name of God].
Then the Celebrant joins the right hands of the couple and says

People

Now that N. and N. have given themselves to each other by solemn vows,
with the joining of hands and the giving and receiving of rings,
I pronounce that they are wed to one another,
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Those whom God has joined together let no one put asunder.
Amen.

The Prayers
All standing, the Celebrant says

Let us pray together in the words our Savior taught us.
People and Celebrant

Our Father, who art in heaven,
hallowed be thy Name,
thy kingdom come,
thy will be done,
on earth as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses,
as we forgive those
who trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil.
For thine is the kingdom,
and the power, and the glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

Our Father in heaven,
hallowed be your Name,
your kingdom come,
your will be done,
on earth as in heaven.
Give us today our daily bread.
Forgive us our sins
as we forgive those
who sin against us.
Save us from the time of trial,
and deliver us from evil.
For the kingdom, the power,
and the glory are yours
now and for ever. Amen.
102 of 158

If Communion is to follow, the Lord’s Prayer may be omitted here.
The Deacon or other person appointed reads the following prayers, to which the People respond, saying, Amen.
If there is not to be a Communion, one or more of the prayers may be omitted.

Let us pray.
Eternal God, creator and preserver of all life, author of salvation, and giver of all grace: Look
with favor upon the world you have made, and for which your Son gave his life, and
especially upon N. and N. whom you make one flesh in Holy Matrimony. Amen.

Leader

Give them wisdom and devotion in the ordering of their common life, that each may be to
the other a strength in need, a counselor in perplexity, a comfort in sorrow, and a companion
in joy. Amen.
Grant that their wills may be so knit together in your will, and their spirits in your Spirit, that
they may grow in love and peace with you and one another all the days of their life. Amen.
Give them grace, when they hurt each other, to recognize and acknowledge their fault, and
to seek each other’s forgiveness and yours. Amen.
Make their life together a sign of Christ’s love to this sinful and broken world, that unity may
overcome estrangement, forgiveness heal guilt, and joy conquer despair. Amen.
Bestow on them, if it is your will, the gift and heritage of children, and the grace to bring
them up to know you, to love you, and to serve you. Amen.
Give them such fulfillment of their mutual affection that they may reach out in love and
concern for others. Amen.
Grant that all married persons who have witnessed these vows may find their lives
strengthened and their loyalties confirmed. Amen.
Grant that the bonds of our common humanity, by which all your children are united one to
another, and the living to the dead, may be so transformed by your grace, that your will may
be done on earth as it is in heaven; where, O Father, with your Son and the Holy Spirit, you
live and reign in perfect unity, now and for ever. Amen.

The Blessing of the Marriage
The People remain standing. The couple kneel, and the Priest says one of the following prayers

Most gracious God, we give you thanks for your tender love in sending Jesus Christ to come
among us, to be born of a human mother, and to make the way of the cross to be the way of
life. We thank you, also, for consecrating the union of two people in his Name. By the power
of your Holy Spirit, pour out the abundance of your blessing upon N. and N. Defend them
from every enemy. Lead them into all peace. Let their love for each other be a seal upon their
hearts, a mantle about their shoulders, and a crown upon their foreheads. Bless them in their
work and in their companionship; in their sleeping and in their waking; in their joys and in
their sorrows; in their life and in their death. Finally, in your mercy, bring them to that table
where your saints feast for ever in your heavenly home; through Jesus Christ our Lord, who
with you and the Holy Spirit lives and reigns, one God, for ever and ever. Amen.
or this

O God, you have so consecrated the covenant of marriage that in it is represented the
spiritual unity between Christ and his Church: Send therefore your blessing upon these your
servants, that they may so love, honor, and cherish each other in faithfulness and patience, in
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

103 of 158

wisdom and true godliness, that their home may be a haven of blessing and peace; through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with you and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and
for ever. Amen.
The couple still kneeling, the Priest adds this blessing

God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Spirit, bless, preserve, and keep you; the Lord
mercifully with his favor look upon you, and fill you with all spiritual benediction and grace;
that you may faithfully live together in this life, and in the age to come have life everlasting.
Amen.

The Peace
The Celebrant may say to the People
People

The peace of the Lord be always with you.
And also with you.

The newly married couple then greet each other, after which greetings may be exchanged throughout the congregation.
When Communion is not to follow, the wedding party leaves the church. A hymn, psalm, or anthem may be sung, or
instrumental music may be played

At the Eucharist
The liturgy continues with the Offertory, at which the newly married couple may present the offerings of bread and wine.

Preface of the Season
At the Communion, it is appropriate that the newly married couple receive Communion first, after the ministers.
In place of the usual postcommunion prayer, the following is said

O God, the giver of all that is true and lovely and gracious:
We give you thanks for binding us together
in these holy mysteries of the Body and Blood
of your Son Jesus Christ.
Grant that by your Holy Spirit,
N. and N., now joined in Holy Matrimony,
may become one in heart and soul,
live in fidelity and peace,
and obtain those eternal joys prepared for all who love you;
for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
As the wedding party leaves the church, a hymn, psalm, or anthem may be sung, or instrumental music may be played.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

104 of 158

a. The Blessing of a Civil Marriage

The rite begins as prescribed for celebrations of the Holy Eucharist, using the Collect and Lessons appointed in the Marriage
service.

After the Gospel (and homily), the couple stand before the Celebrant, who addresses them in these or similar words

N. and N., you have come here today to seek the blessing of God and of his Church upon your
marriage. I require, therefore, that you promise, with the help of God, to fulfill the
obligations which Christian Marriage demands.
The Celebrant then addresses one member of the couple, then the other, saying

Answer

N., you have taken N. to be your wife/husband/spouse. Do you promise to love her/him,
comfort her/him, honor and keep her/him, in sickness and in health, and, forsaking all others,
to be faithful to her/him as long as you both shall live?
I do.

The Celebrant then addresses the congregation, saying

People

Will you who have witnessed these promises do all in your power to uphold these two
persons in their marriage?
We will.

If rings are to be blessed, the members of the couple extend their hands toward the Priest [or Bishop], who says

Bless, O Lord, these rings to be signs of the vows by which N. and N. have bound themselves
to each other; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The Celebrant joins the right hands of the couple and says
People

Those whom God has joined together let no one put asunder.
Amen.

The service continues with The Prayers on page 000.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

105 of 158

b. An Order for Marriage

If it is desired to celebrate a marriage otherwise than as provided on pages 000–000 of “Liturgical Resources
1: The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant (revised and expanded),  this Order is used.
Normally, the celebrant is a priest or bishop. Where permitted by civil law, and when no priest or bishop is
available, a deacon may function as celebrant, but does not pronounce a nuptial blessing.
The laws of the State having been complied with, the couple, together with their witnesses, families, and
friends assemble in the church or in some other convenient place.
1. The teaching of the Church concerning Holy Matrimony, as it is declared in the formularies, is briefly
stated.
2. The intention of the two to enter the state of matrimony, and their free consent, is publicly
ascertained.
3. One or more Readings, one of which is always from Holy Scripture, may precede the exchange of
vows. If there is to be a Communion, a Reading from the Gospel is always included.
4. The vows are exchanged, using the following form
In the Name of God,
I, N., take you, N., to be my wife/husband/spouse,
to have and to hold from this day forward,
for better for worse, for richer for poorer,
in sickness and in health, to love and to cherish,
until we are parted by death.
This is my solemn vow.
or this

I, N., take thee N., to my wedded wife/husband/spouse,
to have and to hold from this day forward,
for better for worse, for richer for poorer,
in sickness and in health, to love and to cherish,
till death us do part, according to God’s holy ordinance;
and thereto I plight [or give] thee my troth.
5. The Celebrant declares the union of the couple, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit.
6. Prayers are offered for the couple, for their life together, for the Christian community, and for the
world.
7. A priest or bishop pronounces a solemn blessing upon the couple.
8. If there is no Communion, the service concludes with the Peace, the couple first greeting each other.
The Peace may be exchanged throughout the assembly.
9. If there is to be a Communion, the service continues with the Peace and the Offertory. The Holy
Eucharist may be celebrated either according to Rite One or Rite Two, or according to the Order on page
401 of the Book of Common Prayer 1979.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

106 of 158

Additional Directions
If Banns are to be published, the following form is used
I publish the Banns of Marriage between N. N. of
and N. N. of
.
If any of you know just cause why they may not be joined together in Holy Matrimony, you are
bidden to declare it. This is the first [or second, or third] time of asking.
The Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage may be used with any authorized liturgy for the Holy Eucharist.
This service then replaces the Ministry of the Word, and the Eucharist begins with the Offertory.
After the Declaration of Consent, if there is to be a giving in marriage, or presentation, the Celebrant asks,
Who presents [gives] these two people to be married to each other?
The appropriate answer is, “I do.  If more than one person responds, they do so together.
For the Ministry of the Word it is fitting that the couple to be married remain where they may conveniently
hear the reading of Scripture. They may approach the Altar, either for the exchange of vows, or for the
Blessing of the Marriage.
It is appropriate that all remain standing until the conclusion of the Collect. Seating may be provided for the
wedding party, so that all may be seated for the Lessons and the homily.
The Apostles’ Creed may be recited after the Lessons, or after the homily, if there is one.
When desired, some other suitable symbol of the vows may be used in place of the ring.
At the Offertory, it is desirable that the bread and wine be presented to the ministers by the newly married
persons. They may then remain before the Lord’s Table and receive Holy Communion before other members
of the congregation.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

107 of 158

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

108 of 158

VI. DISCUSSION GUIDE
to
“I Will Bless You, and You Will Be a Blessing  (revised and expanded edition)

Contents
Introduction to the Discussion Guide
1. Study Area One: History
2. Study Area Two: Theology and the Bible
3. Study Area Three: Liturgy
4. Study Area Four: Civil and Canon Law
5. Study Area Five: Mission
Handouts for Discussions
A. Covenant for Discussion
Study Area One
B. Understanding the History
C. An Introduction to General Convention
D. Relationships and Blessing: Reflection Questions
A Review of General Convention Legislation (Appendix 2)
Study Area Two
E. Theological Reflection on Same-Sex Relationships: A Summary of “Faith, Hope, and Love 
Study Area Three
F. Principles for Evaluating Liturgical Materials

Introduction to the Discussion Guide
This discussion guide invites the people of the Episcopal Church into a process of thoughtful consideration of
the liturgical and theological resources for blessing same-sex relationships. Each of the five modules
contains introductory teaching material and questions for group discussion; the first three also have
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

109 of 158

handouts. The questions are shaped to equip individuals and groups to explore the materials in this
collection in a reflective Christian manner.
These materials encourage participants to approach the discussion of resources for blessing same-sex
relationships with respect for one another and for the various perspectives that individuals will bring to the
conversation.
Because the same ideas will not inspire or challenge all groups, each area of study is wide-ranging and could
span more than one session. Many congregations currently gather for Bible study and adult formation or
education, and leaders can adapt these materials for such forums. Congregations may choose to engage in
this process over an extended period of time or plan a one- to two-day retreat in order to enter more deeply
into conversation and study. The amount of time suggested for particular discussions may be adjusted to
meet the needs of a group. We strongly encourage that each session include time for Bible study related to
the topic.
Encouraging time for participants to speak from their own experiences is essential when people engage in
theological reflection on any topic. Significant factors in the conversation will include the cultural context of
individuals and the makeup of the community. Each session’s opening gives participants an opportunity to
introduce themselves.
Ideally, the facilitator of these conversations will be someone who is respected by the community and who is
respectful of, and familiar with, the group. Facilitators should read the entire resource “I Will Bless You, and
You Will Be a Blessing  in preparation for leading discussion; they should also be familiar with local civil law
and diocesan policies.

Establishing Group Norms for Conversations
Prayers and practices that make for good conversations
Parishioners enter the conversation about blessing same-sex relationships from many different starting
points. Some congregations and individuals do not understand why any Episcopal church would bless samesex relationships; others do not understand why the blessing of same-sex relationships continues to be
controversial. Recognizing these differences, facilitators should begin these conversations with agreement
for respectful conversation; a Covenant for Discussion is included among the handouts found at the end of
this discussion guide. Beginning and ending each session with prayers of thanksgiving for the opportunity
for dialogue can underscore the value of respectful discussion.
The idea that the Church is a safe place to disagree is attractive, but living it out is difficult. Doing so requires
that we expand our boundaries to accept those we do not understand or with whom we do not agree on
matters of great importance. We do this because, more than anything, Christians do agree on matters of the
greatest importance—the love and salvation offered by Jesus Christ. While we may disagree over the
definition of marriage and how we understand biblical texts about divorce and sexuality, we can agree on
our shared participation in Christ’s mission to restore all people to unity with God and each other in Christ.
The goal of dialogue is not to win the day for one’s own point of view, but for all participants to grow in
understanding of both themselves and others. If participants come to this conversation with open hearts
and minds, it is possible to honor both the integrity and holiness of gay and lesbian couples and their
families, and the deep traditions of the Church.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

110 of 158

Recommended Background Materials
To Set Our Hope on Christ (2005)1 was prepared as a response to the request by the Windsor Report (2004)
that the Episcopal Church explain how “a person living in a same gender union may be considered eligible to
lead the flock of Christ.  This document provides an overview as to how and why the Episcopal Church has
moved toward the fuller inclusion of gay and lesbian people in the life of the Church. The appendix
comprises a historical summary of beliefs and policies concerning sexuality in the Episcopal Church.
The June 2009 Report of the Task Force on Holiness in Relationships and the Blessing of Same-Sex Relationships,
from the Episcopal Diocese of San Diego,2 presents different points of view in an even-handed manner. The
report considers the interpretation of Holy Scripture; marriage and holiness in Scripture; biblical texts that
may condemn same-sex relationships and those that may portray positive roles of gays and lesbians; Church
history and tradition; practical, pastoral and sacramental theology; and the movement of the Holy Spirit.
The 2015 Report of the Task Force on the Study of Marriage3 is the final report of the task force established by
the 2012 General Convention in Resolution 2012-A050. It considers marriage from biblical, theological,
historical, and liturgical perspectives. While the work of the task force was not limited to consideration of
the marriage of same-sex couples, the essays may be useful in light of the 2015 General Convention decision
to permit same-sex marriage.

1. Study Area One: History
History: Reviewing the history of the Episcopal Church’s decisions regarding same-sex relationships and
reflecting on the current context

A. Preparing for the Session
Have the following handouts ready (included at the end of this Discussion Guide, unless otherwise noted):
•

A. Covenant for Discussion

•

B. Understanding the History

•

C. An Introduction to General Convention

•

A Review of General Convention Legislation (Appendix 3)

•

D. Relationships and Blessing: Reflection Questions

Prepare for the Bible study to be offered in this session by choosing the passage to be read and deciding on
the method of study.

B. Gathering
•

Welcome participants and make any announcements necessary regarding hospitality (restrooms,
coffee) and scheduling.

•

Continue with a prayer of thanksgiving for the opportunity to have this conversation.

1
To Set Our Hope in Christ: A Response to the Invitation of Windsor Report ¶135 is available on the website of the Episcopal Church:
http://www.episcopalchurch.org/documents/ToSetOurHope_eng.pdf.
2
Report of the Task Force on Holiness in Relationships and the Blessing of Same-Sex Relationships is available on the website of the
Episcopal Diocese of San Diego: http://www.edsd.org/mediafiles/holiness-in-relationships-task-force-report.pdf.
3

Report of the Task Force on the Study of Marriage is available on the website of the General Convention:
http://extranet.generalconvention.org/staff/files/download/12485.pdf.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

111 of 158

•

Go around the room to have each person introduce herself or himself and share what he/she is
most looking forward to in these conversations.

•

Establish group norms for engaging in respectful conversation. Facilitators may distribute and
review the Covenant for Discussion provided in the handouts, or choose a set of norms from their
own resources.

•

Introduce the Bible study prepared for this session.

C. Introducing the Topic
Distribute the worksheet Understanding the History and give participants about 10 minutes to complete it.
After everyone has had time to write something, ask everyone to share their answers to “A  (how long the
Episcopal Church has been talking about same-sex relationships and its gay, lesbian, bisexual, and
transgender members). Continue by inviting participants to share whatever is comfortable from “B  for each
decade. Listen to see whether there is a thread or theme that runs through the memories.

D. General Convention Legislation
Give a very brief description of what General Convention is, who attends, and what it does, using the
handout An Introduction to General Convention.
Distribute A Review of General Convention Legislation, and discuss it in light of responses to the worksheet.
Here—and throughout the balance of the sessions—clearly distinguish when you are expressing an idea or
opinion based on your own experience and when you are communicating official Church stances.

E. The Blessings of Relationships
Ask the group to call to mind at least three committed relationships they are familiar with: for example,
relationships of family members, friends at work or school, or couples in your congregation; or their own
committed relationship. Remind them that they may know people in committed relationships who are not
married for one reason or another.
Divide into groups of threes, and distribute the handout Relationships and Blessing: Reflection Questions.
Instruct the group to reflect for 15 or 20 minutes on the questions in the handout, which explore the nature
of committed relationships. Afterward, have them reflect back to the larger group by asking these
questions:
•

What was especially illuminating or challenging in your conversations?

•

Regarding the complexities of the relationships you discussed, were there any surprises?

•

Based on your conversations, why do you think the Church blesses any committed relationships
at all?

F. Conclusion
Thank the participants for coming, remind them of the next meeting date and time, and close with a prayer
of thanksgiving.

2. Study Area Two: Theology and the Bible
Theology and the Bible: Examining our understanding of God’s blessing through the lens of theology and
Scripture
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

112 of 158

A. Preparing for the Session
Have the following handouts ready (included at the end of this discussion guide):
•

A. Covenant for Discussion (or other norm for discussion)

•

E. Theological Reflection on Same-Sex Relationships: A Summary of “Faith, Hope, and Love 

Prepare for the Bible study to be offered in this session by choosing the passage to be read and deciding on
the method of study.

B. Gathering
•

Welcome participants and make any announcements necessary regarding hospitality (restrooms,
coffee) and scheduling.

•

Continue with a prayer of thanksgiving for the opportunity to have this conversation.

•

Review group norms for engaging in respectful conversation, using the Covenant for Discussion
or other set of norms established in the first session.

•

Invite participants who attended the previous session to share illuminations and challenges that
occurred to them regarding the history of the Episcopal Church, rites of blessing same-sex
relationships, and their own experience of blessings revealed in committed relationships.

•

Introduce the Bible study prepared for this session.

C. Introducing the Topic
Introduce the theological principles with these or similar words:
In the Episcopal Church, we develop our theology, or the way we think about God, through
Scripture, tradition, and reason. Consider, for example, the concept of “hospitality. 
Numerous examples in Scripture tell of God’s hospitality toward God’s people and of the
people of God issuing or withholding God’s hospitality from others. Although some of the
stories seem to show behavior that conflicts with the ways God might have us respond to
outsiders today, these biblical stories still help guide us. Other theological principles, like
eschatology (beliefs about final events in the history of the world) and the triune nature of
God, take a little more exploration from Scripture to interpret in light of Christian experience
and understanding over the millennia since biblical times. We believe that God continues to
reveal God’s self to the world. We experience this revelation in many ways, including faithful,
lifelong, committed relationships.
Distribute Theological Reflection on Same-Sex Relationships and ask participants to read and reflect on this
summary of the essay “Faith, Hope, and Love.  Describing relationships as “covenantal,  this document
identifies four themes for theological reflection: vocation, households, fruitfulness, and mutual blessing.
Invite the group to discuss some or all of these principles, using the introductions and discussion questions
that follow.

D. Covenant
Introduce the concept of “covenant  with these or similar words:
Covenants are made and held in relationships not only between the individual and God but
within a community, which is also held accountable. The Baptismal Covenant is an example
that will be familiar to Episcopalians, where commitments are made by (or for) the individual
being baptized as well as by the sponsors and the gathered community.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

113 of 158

Covenants take many forms in Scripture. They typically, but not always, contain a solemn
agreement in which all parties pledge themselves to the others, outlining mutual obligations
and responsibilities. Scripture tells about covenants concerning marriage, water rights, tribal
relationships, protection, and faithfulness; the covenants include rituals involving animals,
exchanges, and other gestures of the now-sealed relationship. The book of Genesis contains
a series of covenants God made. For example, after making a covenant with Noah (Genesis
6:18) to protect his family from the impending flood, God makes a covenant with creation: “I
establish my covenant with you, that never again shall all flesh be cut off by the waters of a
flood, and never again shall there be a flood to destroy the earth  (Genesis 9:11).
Relational commitment can lead a couple to enter into a lifelong covenant in which their love
and faithfulness participate in and reflect God’s own gracious covenant with us in Christ.

Discussion Questions to Further Reflection and Understanding
•

One description of the difference between a contract and a covenant reads: “A contract is an
agreement made in suspicion. A covenant is an agreement made in trust.  What are some
examples of contracts and covenants in your own life?

•

Where have you seen God’s graciousness evidenced in committed relationships of couples you
have known?

E. Vocation
Introduce the theme of “vocation  with these or similar words:
Some people are called into long-term committed relationships as a vocation, defined here as
a responsibility or way of life to which one is called by God. In Scripture, we find an example
of this kind of relationship in Abraham and Sarah, who are vocationally linked to God and to
one another. They are sent on a journey together that changes not just their names but the
world (Genesis 11:27–25:11). Many other examples of committed relationships in the Bible—
for example, Ruth and Naomi (Ruth 1), Eli and Samuel (1 Samuel 3), Jesus and his disciples—
might be considered vocational, that is, carrying a function called by God. These partnerships
defined not only the individuals but also the work they had to do together as a function of
God’s life in the world.

Discussion Questions to Further Reflection and Understanding
•

Have you been in, witnessed, or read about relationships you could consider “vocational ? If so,
what makes them so?

•

In the Bible we are told that Paul, when counseling early Christians about the complexities and
persecutions Christians were facing at the time, suggested that remaining single is a way to serve
God, a vocation to “promote good order and unhindered devotion to the Lord  (1 Corinthians
7:35). Not everyone is called into long-term committed relationships; being single may be a
vocation for some. Have you experienced, or do you know other people who have experienced,
singleness as a vocation?

F. Households
Introduce the theme of “households  with these or similar words:
Households take many different forms. Consider the story of the prodigal son, in which
obligations of loyalty and love were made, broken, and reconciled. Families of origin come
with implicit household covenants. When individuals join together to create new households,
they have the opportunity to bind themselves to one another in new ways. In these newly
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

114 of 158

created households, the covenanted relationships within allow for holy love, care, risk-taking,
and sacrifice on behalf of the other. People have reflected that, in such relationships, they
begin to understand God’s unconditional love of, and faithfulness to, us. They experience
many of the gifts that such a household can bring, including mutual joy, companionship,
faithfulness, compromise, charity, grace, and forgiveness.

Discussion Questions to Further Reflection and Understanding
•

The Theological Reflection on Same-Sex Relationships handout states: “While households take
many different forms, they create a space of mutual trust and accountability  where we can
“learn the spiritual disciplines of compassion, forgiveness, and reconciliation.  Have you known
or experienced households that provide that “sacred space ? How does thinking about
households as a theological concept resonate with your experience?

•

In the story of the prodigal son (Luke 15:11–32), the household celebrates when the father
welcomes the younger son with compassion, despite the son’s disregard for their family
agreements. What similar responses have you seen in households you have known, and what do
such responses reveal about the nature of households?

•

In the same story, the elder brother resents the prodigal. What do you think gets in the way of
healing the break in mutual trust and accountability between these two members of the same
household?

G. Mutual Blessing and Fruitfulness
Introduce the themes of “mutual blessing  and “fruitfulness  with these or similar words:
Former Archbishop of Canterbury Donald Coggan summed up the essence of the apostle
Paul’s message to the world in three words: grace, love, and fellowship: “These are the key
words of what has become the second-best-known prayer in the Christian Church: ‘The grace
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, be with
you all.’ 4 Grace. Love. Fellowship. These blessings are abundant in Christian relationships
and in Christian communities.
The apostle Paul tells us, “the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness,
generosity, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control  (Galatians 5:22). Just as Abraham was
blessed by God in order to be a blessing (Genesis 12:2), the commitment exhibited in
covenantal relationships becomes a source of blessing for the whole Church. When divine
grace sustains a covenantal relationship it bears fruit in countless ways, not only for the
couple but for the wider community as well.
When we are present in any public naming of graces or gifts, be it baptism or graduation or
the giving of an award, we are often reminded that the individual or group upon which the
recognition is bestowed is expected to return that value back to society. At a liturgy of
blessing, we are reminded of the value of the individuals entering into a covenant with one
another—of their love, faith, loyalty, and devotion to each other and to God. As we bless
their relationship we expect in return that this naming and strengthening of the couple will
bless the congregation.

Discussion Questions to Further Reflection and Understanding
•

4

In your experience, how have you seen covenantal relationships that are blessed in the Church
become in turn a blessing for the Church?

Donald Coggan, Meet Paul: An Encounter with the Apostle (London: SPCK, 1998), 73–75.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

115 of 158

•

In your experience, how have you seen covenantal relationships bear fruit?

•

How can the blessing of a same-sex relationship sustain and enable a couple to embody service,
generosity, and hospitality beyond their household?

H. Conclusion
Thank the participants for coming, remind them of the next meeting date and time, and close with a prayer
of thanksgiving.

3. Study Area Three: Liturgy
Liturgy: Discussing liturgy in general and the liturgical resources developed for marriage and for the blessing of
same-sex relationships

A. Preparing for the Session
Have the following handouts ready (included at the end of this discussion guide, unless otherwise noted):
•

A. Covenant for Discussion (or other norm for discussion)

•

F. Principles for Evaluating Liturgical Materials

•

Liturgy: “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant  or “The Witnessing and Blessing
of a Marriage 

•

Liturgy: “The Celebration of a Marriage (2)  (optional)

Prior to the session, solicit volunteers to walk through the liturgy (ending with the greeting of the Peace)
during the session. Ask them to be respectful of the process and to recognize that even when role-playing
the words and actions in a liturgy can have an impact on the people saying and doing them.
Prepare for the Bible study to be offered in this session by choosing the passage to be read and deciding on
the method of study.

B. Gathering
•

Welcome participants and make any announcements necessary regarding hospitality (restrooms,
coffee) and scheduling.

•

Continue with a prayer of thanksgiving for the opportunity to have this conversation.

•

Review group norms for engaging in respectful conversation, using the Covenant for Discussion
or other set of norms established in the first session.

•

Invite participants who attended the previous session to share illuminations and challenges that
have occurred to them regarding the interaction of the Bible and theology with the blessing of
same-sex relationships.

•

Introduce the Bible study prepared for this session.

C. Introducing the Topic
Introduce a discussion of the meaning and purpose of liturgy with these or similar words:
Christians over the centuries have found ways to ritualize our story as a people of God, our
place in God’s life today, and our hope for an eternity with Christ. Liturgy, as an event, retells
salvation history in word and sacrament: by the proclamation of Scripture, through preaching
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

116 of 158

and prayer, and in the liturgy of the table. Each time we celebrate liturgy, we become active
participants in re-presenting this history—life with God, from creation and fall through
covenant, redemption, and fulfillment—and in bringing it into the present. When we
consecrate water during baptism, we go back to the waters of creation at the beginning of
our story. We are buried with Christ in this water and brought forth into a new life in Christ, a
new future. Scripture calls us to keep rituals when we are told to “make this day holy  or to
“remember this place  or to “do this  from this day forward in order to keep our inherited
faith as present as it ever was.
Liturgy can be understood as an exchange between heaven and earth. All that we have
comes from God, and that is what we return. In our prayers, we as a community breathe in
and out our petitions, thanksgivings, sorrows, hopes, and praises.
Celebrating important moments in the lives of individual Christians and in the community
often happens in the context of liturgy. In the liturgies of baptism, confirmation, marriage,
and ordination, we join together to enact and celebrate our commitment to a vocation with
Christ and with one another.

D. Qualities of Anglican Liturgy
Distribute the handout Principles for Evaluating Liturgical Materials, and introduce the principles with these or
similar words:
In Resolution 2009–C056, the General Convention directed the Standing Commission on
Liturgy and Music to “collect and develop theological and liturgical resources  for the
blessing of same-sex relationships. The Commission discovered a vast array of unofficial
liturgies, some dating back to the 1970s, and, more recently, rites of blessing commended for
use in dioceses in the Episcopal Church and the Anglican Church of Canada. These liturgies
were created in response to the pastoral needs of same-sex couples in various local
jurisdictions. The Commission found strong similarities in the rites; many used The
Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage from the Book of Common Prayer as a template.
This research led the Commission to develop liturgical principles to assess the resources it
had collected and as the basis for creating a new liturgical resource to present to General
Convention in 2012. Consistency with Anglican theological tradition and the liturgical style of
the 1979 Book of Common Prayer was essential in developing these materials. Keeping
proposed rites as an expression of the whole Church, not only the two people seeking a
blessing, was also important. A full list of those qualities is in the handout.
These qualities can be gathered into two general categories: words and actions. In liturgy,
words and actions together express and shape what we believe. In “The Witnessing and
Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant,  this combination of words and actions expresses what we
understand and hope about blessing, households, and the revelation of God’s love in the
world through these committed relationships.

E. Exploring the Liturgy for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships
Distribute copies of the liturgy or liturgies you have decided to use (“The Witnessing and Blessing of a
Lifelong Covenant  or “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Marriage ; “The Celebration and Blessing of a
Marriage [2] ) and invite participants to keep in mind the principles outlined in the handout for evaluating
liturgical materials as they role-play the liturgy.
Before reading through the liturgy with the volunteers selected in advance of the session, explain that it is
not the intention of this “couple  to receive this blessing. Acknowledge that there may be anxiety when
role-playing the rite, and invite participants to engage the experience prayerfully. When finished, remind the
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

117 of 158

“couple,  the “presider,  and the “assembly  that the role-play is not binding, and thank the volunteers for
their help.

Discussion Questions to Further Reflection and Understanding
•

What did you hear?

•

What did you see?

•

What did you feel?

•

How does this liturgy hold to the liturgical principles set forth in the handout?

•

What words, symbols, and actions in this liturgy stand out for you and draw you into reflection
on your own experience of covenantal relationship?

•

What do the words, symbols, and actions call forth, challenge, or offer to the couple who
experience them in the context of a blessing of their relationship?

•

In your experience, which elements seem to have the most meaning when a community gathers
to receive God’s blessing?

F. Conclusion
Thank the participants for coming, remind them of the next meeting date and time, and close with a prayer
of thanksgiving.

4. Study Area Four: Civil and Canon Law
Civil and Canon Law: Exploring legal, canonical, and spiritual issues that arise as the Church considers blessing
same-sex couples

A. Preparing for the Session
Have the following handout ready:
•

A. Covenant for Discussion (or other norm for discussion)

Set up two pages of newsprint, each with two columns:
One page of newsprint:
MARRIAGE
Secular Benefits / Obligations

Sacred Benefits / Obligations

The other page of newsprint:
BLESSING
Secular Benefits / Obligations

Sacred Benefits / Obligations

Prepare for the Bible study to be offered in this session by choosing the passage to be read and deciding on
the method of study.

B. Gathering
•

Welcome participants and make any announcements necessary regarding hospitality (restrooms,
coffee) and scheduling.

•

Continue with a prayer of thanksgiving for the opportunity to have this conversation.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

118 of 158

•

Review group norms for engaging in respectful conversation, using the Covenant for Discussion
or other set of norms established in the first session.

•

Invite participants who attended the previous session to share illuminations and challenges that
have occurred to them regarding the liturgy for the blessing of same-sex relationships.

•

Introduce the Bible study prepared for this session.

C. Introducing the Topic
Introduce the discussion of civil and canon law with these or similar words:
Resolution 2009–C056 directed the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music to develop
resources for blessing same-gender relationships. As the Commission went about its work,
Episcopalians asked about the relationship between these blessings and marriage. Following
the direction of General Convention, the Commission developed a resource for blessing
relationships, not marriage. In 2015 the General Convention authorized two marriage liturgies
for trial use and also authorized a liturgy for blessing same-sex relationships.
In June 2015, the Supreme Court of the United States issued a ruling that permits marriage of
same-sex couples throughout the United States. In the years prior to this decision, several
states permitted civil unions of same-sex couples but not marriage. Some dioceses of the
Episcopal Church outside of the United States are in civil jurisdictions that do not permit
same-sex marriage.
The Book of Common Prayer (p. 422) and Canon I.18.1 require Episcopal clergy to conform to
the laws of their state governing the creation of a civil marriage.

D. Exploring the Benefits and Obligations of Marriage and Blessing
Invite people to brainstorm about the secular benefits and obligations of marriage, and note their answers in
that column of the newsprint page headed “Marriage.  Then ask about the sacred benefits and obligations
of marriage and note their answers. Now, do the same on the page with the heading “Blessing  (that is,
blessing a lifelong, committed relationship)—secular benefits and obligations first, then sacred benefits and
obligations. Step back and ask people what they notice about the four lists. Have a conversation.
The following is a list of responses people might give:
Marriage: Secular Benefits / Obligations
•

Legal status given by the state: global for different-sex couple; country-specific for same-sex
couple

•

Part of the institution of marriage and its social benefits

•

Potential financial benefits—joint tax returns, automatic joint ownership, etc.—global for
different-sex couple; only in certain countries for same-sex couple

•

Clarity about the relationship—fits a known model, people know what you are talking about if
you say you are married; clarity about monogamy and faithfulness

•

Legal responsibilities shared by the couple

•

Social status

•

Usually, acceptance of parents, family, and friends of the relationship

Marriage: Sacred Benefits / Obligations
•

God’s blessing proclaimed by the Church

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

119 of 158

•

Recognition of spiritual nature of relationship

•

Public religious and spiritual commitment of love

•

Call to constant reconciliation and assurance of forgiveness

•

Spiritual preparation and counseling prior to ceremony

•

“Church wedding  and social recognition and support of religious community

•

Exchange and blessing of symbols of relationship—ring(s)

•

Done as part of the Prayer Book and Episcopal Church norms

Blessing: Secular Benefits / Obligations
•

Possible gained clarity about the relationship; commitment statements made to one another

•

Possible social status

•

Possible acceptance/recognition of parents, family, and friends

Blessing: Sacred Benefits / Obligations
•

God’s blessing proclaimed by the Church

•

Recognition of spiritual nature of relationship; clarity about monogamy and faithfulness

•

Public religious and spiritual commitment of love

•

Call to constant reconciliation and assurance of forgiveness

•

Spiritual preparation and counseling prior to ceremony

•

“Church wedding  and social recognition and support of religious community

•

Exchange and blessing of symbols of relationship—ring(s)

•

Falls within Episcopal Church norms

Invite the group to draw conclusions from the lists and their discussion of them. They might discover that
when the Church blesses same-sex couples such blessings seem to carry most but not all of the “sacred
benefit  that one finds in marriage, and when the Church blesses same-sex couples such blessings seem to
carry much less of the “secular benefit  that one finds in marriage.

E. Conclusion
Thank the participants for coming, remind them of the next meeting date and time, and close with a prayer
of thanksgiving.

5. Study Area Five: Mission
Mission: Exploring the blessing of same-sex relationships as part of the Church’s mission and God’s reconciling
work in the world

A. Preparing for the Session
Have the following handout ready:
•

A. Covenant for Discussion (or other norm for discussion)

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

120 of 158

Prepare for the Bible study to be offered in this session by choosing the passage to be read and deciding on
the method of study.

B. Gathering
•

Welcome participants and make any announcements necessary regarding hospitality (restrooms,
coffee) and scheduling.

•

Continue with a prayer of thanksgiving for the opportunity to have this conversation.

•

Review group norms for engaging in respectful conversation, using the Covenant for Discussion
or other set of norms established in the first session.

•

Invite participants who attended the previous session to share illuminations and challenges that
have occurred to them regarding the comparison of marriage and blessings.

•

Introduce the Bible study prepared for this session.

C. Introducing the Topic
Introduce this final session by reminding participants that we are a part of a larger story, using these or
similar words:
Using the “three-legged stool  of Anglicanism, we have explored Scripture, tradition, and
reason relating to the development of rites for blessing same-sex relationships in the
Episcopal Church. We have explored God’s call to us to live in relationship to God and to one
another. We may have disagreed, misunderstood, or challenged one another, but we have
been reminded at each turn that our life together, centered in baptism and the eucharist, is
central to being people of faith in this time and in this Church.
The essay “Faith, Hope, and Love  has this to say about the significance for mission of
blessing same-sex relationships:
This missional character of covenantal blessing, reflected in both Scripture
and the historical traditions of the Church, deserves renewed attention
today. The 2000 General Convention contributed to this renewal when it
passed Resolution D039, which identified monogamy, fidelity, holy love, and
other characteristics of lifelong, committed relationships. Significantly, that
resolution was framed as a way to enable the Church to engage more
effectively in its mission. Many in the Episcopal Church have witnessed these
characteristics in the committed relationships of same-sex couples. That
recognition can, and in many places already has, broadened the
understanding of the Church’s mission of participating in God’s reconciling
work in the world.
Our willingness to continue to receive a new thing while remaining in communion and in love
with one other models a gift we have to offer the world.
We began our study by exploring the Episcopal Church’s recent history regarding same-sex
couples seeking acceptance and blessing of their relationships in the Church, and by
reflecting on our own experiences of lifelong, committed relationships. We continued with a
study of the theological and liturgical resources that the Standing Commission on Liturgy and
Music developed. Finally, we compared the benefits and obligations of marriage and blessing
same-sex relationships.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

121 of 158

Discussion Questions to Further Reflection and Understanding
•

Over the past few weeks, how have our conversations emerged in the course of your daily lives?
Have you found yourselves talking (or e-mailing or Facebook-ing) with colleagues, friends, or
family regarding the willingness of the Episcopal Church to provide these blessings?

•

This discussion guide was designed to equip participants to understand the presence of rites of
blessing same-sex relationships in our common life in the Episcopal Church. Did it fulfill that
purpose for you? Why or why not?

•

If your community is not considering offering these rites to same-sex couples seeking marriage
or a blessing of their relationship, are you able to explain why other parishes or dioceses in the
Episcopal Church are? If yes, where would you begin that explanation? If no, what more
information or background would be helpful?

D. Conclusion
Thank everyone for participating, for their hard work and dedication, and for loving the Church and those
who come through the doors enough to have these conversations together.
Close with a prayer of thanksgiving.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

122 of 158

Handout A

Covenant for Discussion
As we gather in the name of Christ to share our thoughts, feelings, and ideas, we accept this covenant to
guide our conversation along God’s path of love.
•

I recognize that everyone comes to this experience with very different backgrounds,
experiences, and views. I will respectfully seek clarification of other perspectives to add to my
understanding.

•

If I choose to disagree with a perspective different from mine, I will do this in a loving and
respectful way.

•

Speak only for myself (using “I  statements).

•

Take responsibility for my own thoughts and feelings.

•

Remember my baptismal promise to “respect the dignity of every human being. 

•

Seek and acknowledge common ground.

•

Honor confidentiality unless permission to share is explicitly given.

•

Practice “sacred listening  by:

I will:








Listening for God in the experiences of others.
Accepting those experiences as valid for the speakers.
Searching for strengths in the other’s position.
Avoiding interruptions and argument.
Avoiding applause or other reactions to speakers.
Allowing each person to speak before I speak again.

If a particular group or person is going to be discussed, some of them should be present.

Adapted from Our Covenant for Conversation, the Episcopal Diocese of Vermont; Good News: A Congregational Resource for
Reconciliation, by the Right Reverend Steven Charleston (2003); and Intimate Human Relationships: Resources for Conversation in the
Congregations and Deaneries of the Episcopal Diocese of Vermont, edited by Anne Clarke Brown (2004).

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

123 of 158

Handout B

Understanding the History
Please use this worksheet to record your memories and thoughts about discussion of same-sex relationships
over the past few decades.
A.

The Episcopal Church has formally been talking about same-sex relationships and its gay, lesbian,
bisexual, and transgender members for how many years?

B.

Under each decade list briefly—using just key words—what you remember about:
1. What was going on in your own life.
2. What was going on in the world and/or the Church.
3. What was going on with issues of same-sex relationships.

1970s

1980s

1990s

2000s

2010s

1
What I remember
in my own life

2
What I remember
happening in the
world and / or
the Church

3
What I remember
about issues of
same-sex
relationships

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

124 of 158

Handout C

An Introduction to General Convention
With few precedents for a republican form of Church governance, the first General Convention met in 1785 in
Philadelphia. That convention began work on a constitution and a revision of the Book of Common Prayer,
the Church’s book of worship. Within ten years the General Convention had agreed on its form of
governance and its pattern of worship, both of which endure to the present day.
Uniquely for its time, the first General Conventions determined on a bicameral house in which elected
(rather than royally appointed) bishops would make up one house, and lay and ordained deputies (equally
represented) would make up the other house.
All bishops of the Episcopal Church, active and retired, are entitled to seat, voice, and vote in the House of
Bishops (unless deprived of the privilege). Each of the Episcopal Church’s dioceses (and the Convocation of
Churches in Europe and the Navajoland Area Mission) is entitled to elect eight deputies, four laypersons and
four priests and/or deacons, to the House of Deputies. (The diocesan electors of deputies are themselves
elected representatives from local parishes.) Deputies are not delegates; that is, they are not elected to
represent the electing dioceses.
Deputies vote their conscience for the good of the Church. They cannot be instructed to vote one way or
another, for to do so would preclude godly debate and preempt the work of the Holy Spirit. Deputies are
expected to serve on committees, if appointed, to attend forums and hearings, to read the reports to the
Church from its commissions, committees, agencies, and boards, to listen to, and if so moved, to respond to
resolutions on the floor of the house.
The House of Bishops and House of Deputies meet, deliberate, and vote separately. To be enacted,
resolutions must pass both houses in the same language. Both houses have the right to amend legislation,
but the amendment must be accepted by the other house. Resolutions presented to Convention come from
four sources: committees, commissions, agencies, and boards of the Church; bishops; dioceses and
provinces; and deputies.
The House of Bishops is chaired by the Presiding Bishop, and the House of Deputies is chaired by an elected
President of the House. In the absence of the presiding officer, a Vice Chair (in the House of Bishops) or Vice
President (in the House of Deputies) chairs. In each house, a secretary and parliamentarian assist the
presiding officer.
General Convention meets prayerfully. Each day, bishops, deputies, registered alternates, and delegates to
the ECW Triennial Meeting gather for Bible study and the Holy Eucharist. Both the House of Deputies and the
House of Bishops have chaplains, who lead their houses in regular prayer at the beginning and end of
sessions and daily at noon. Chaplains are also asked to pray before the enactment of important legislation.
Organizations within the Church sponsor additional worship services, while volunteers staff a prayer room in
which there is continual intercession for the work of Convention.
Much of the work of Convention is carried out by legislative committees. The Presiding Bishop and the
President of the House of Deputies determine the number of persons who serve on committees and their
membership. In their appointments, the presiding officers consider previous experience, expertise, and
interest, ensuring the committees represent diverse points of view, geographic, ethnic and gender diversity,
and participation by younger deputies.
Resolutions proposed for discussion at Convention are referred to legislative committees, which consider,
amalgamate, and perfect them before presenting them on the floor of Convention. Legislative committees

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

125 of 158

hold hearings on legislation at which the following can speak: bishop, deputy, registered alternate deputy, or
registered visitor.
Debate on the floor is governed by the Constitution and Canons of the Church, Rules of Order for each
house, Joint Rules of Order (that apply to both houses) and Roberts’ Rules of Order. Deputies are expected
to listen respectfully to the views of others and to adhere to the rules, which require, for example, that
persons of different points of view alternate at microphones.
Convention is more than legislation. One of the most interesting parts of Convention is the Exhibit Hall, a
marketplace of goods and ideas in which the organizations and interest groups within the Church present
their wares, recruit members, and do their best to influence legislation.
Many Church-related organizations hold meetings in conjunction with Convention, and there are lunches and
dinners hosted by seminaries, provinces, societies, boards and staff offices of the Church. The Episcopal
Church Women (ECW) holds its triennial meeting simultaneously with the General Convention. The ECW
meeting has changed over the past several decades; today it focuses on the mission and service of the
Church, and many of the Church’s most distinguished members are invited to address this body.
General Convention is a combination of legislative assembly, bazaar of goods and services, and family
reunion. It is one of the most exciting and, truth be told, one of the most awe-inspiring gatherings in the
world.

Adapted from an introduction to the 2009 General Convention prepared by the Reverend Dr. Gregory S. Straub, Executive Officer
and Secretary of General Convention

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

126 of 158

Handout D

Relationships and Blessing: Reflection Questions
I invite you to reflect on the committed relationships of couples you know (friends, colleagues, family
members, and so on), whether same-sex or not, including your own, if you are in such a relationship.
Consider questions such as these:
•

How is each relationship named or described: marriage? covenant? union? some other way? Are
those involved in the relationship considered husband and wife? partners? lovers? Does the term
vary depending on circumstances? How important (or not) is the terminology used for your
understanding and experience of the relationship?

•

As you reflect on these relationships, what about them (their qualities, gifts, character) would
make them appropriate for a liturgical blessing? Or, to put this in another way, why do we
“bless  committed relationships in a Church at all?

For those who are in a committed relationship:
•

Have you discerned any spiritual gifts that have emerged from your commitment that you may
not have recognized apart from that commitment?

•

What role does your faith community play in your ongoing commitment? Does the community
offer something you find important in your relationship?

•

What role (if any) did your Christian faith play in the early and now ongoing development of your
relationship and in discerning your commitment to each other?

•

Would you consider your committed relationship as part of your Christian calling and vocation to
ministry? If so, how and in what ways?

For those who are reflecting on another couple’s relationship:
•

Have you discerned any spiritual gifts emerging from their relationship that benefit the wider
community or perhaps yourself?

•

Have you discerned what you or your faith community contributes to their relationship?

•

How would you name the primary “blessing  of that relationship in your own life and in your
faith community?

•

Have you learned anything or gained fresh insights about your own life from observing the
relationship and interacting with the couple?

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

127 of 158

Handout E

Theological Reflection on Same-Sex Relationships:
A Summary of “Faith, Hope, and Love 
Baptism, Eucharist, and the Paschal Mystery
All Christians are called to bear witness to the good news of God’s love and grace in Jesus Christ, through the
power of the Holy Spirit. We are empowered for such witness by our covenantal relationship with God.
Baptism initiates us into that covenant, making us Christ’s own forever and members of Christ’s Body, the
Church. The eucharist sustains us in that covenantal life and strengthens us to be Christ’s witnesses in the
world.
Our covenantal life with God can shape and be expressed in our relationships of commitment and
faithfulness with others. Our committed relationships can thus reflect a sacramental character (making divine
grace visible) and evoke eschatological hope (our ultimate union with God). These relationships thus invite
further reflection on the mission of the Church, what it means “to bless,  and the distinguishing marks of a
covenantal relationship.

Themes for Theological Reflection
A sacramental framework for covenantal relationships suggests several other key theological themes for
reflection and shared discernment, including the following:
•

Vocation: God calls people into various kinds of relationship, whether as single people, in
monastic communities, or as intimate couples. These vocational callings can empower our
witness to the gospel. The decision to enter into a covenantal union is likewise a vocation
marked by these characteristics: “fidelity; monogamy; mutual affection and respect; careful,
honest communication; and the holy love which enables those in such relationships to see in
each other the image of God. 

•

Households: Covenantal relationships are often lived in households in which we practice daily the
giving of ourselves for the good of another. While households take many different forms, they
create a space of mutual trust and accountability. The joy, intimacy, and shared vulnerability of
households can thus help us learn the spiritual disciplines of compassion, forgiveness, and
reconciliation in lives of committed monogamy and fidelity.

•

Fruitfulness: The divine grace that sustains a covenantal relationship bears fruit in countless
ways, not only for the couple but for the wider community as well. Covenanted couples manifest
this grace in their shared gifts for ministry and in lives of service, generosity, and hospitality.

•

Mutual Blessing: A blessed relationship is set apart for a divine purpose: to bear witness to the
creating, redeeming, and sanctifying love of God in the world. As the Spirit empowers the couple
for this witness, the Church is likewise blessed and strengthened for its mission and ministry.

In all of these ways and more, the blessing of a same-sex relationship invites covenantal couples and the
whole Church to renew our commitment to the Baptismal Covenant. That commitment is expressed by faith
in the good news of Jesus Christ, in the hope for union with God that Christ promised, and with the love that
knits us together as the Body of Christ. As the apostle Paul reminds us, we live our life together as God’s
people with faith, hope, and love. And the greatest of these is love (1 Corinthians 13:13).

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

128 of 158

Handout F

Principles for Evaluating Liturgical Materials
Materials proposed for blessing same-sex relationships must above all be consistent with the implicit
theology and ecclesiology of the 1979 Book of Common Prayer. This would suggest, for example, that they
must reflect the Prayer Book’s underlying assumption that the entire life of the Church finds its origin in
baptism.
Nearly as important is that the proposed liturgical materials embody a classically Anglican liturgical ethos and
style. Recognizing the varying notions of what makes public prayer recognizably Anglican, the task group
identified these qualities:
•

It resonates with Scripture and proclaims the gospel.

•

It is rooted in Anglican theological tradition.

•

It has high literary value; it is beautiful according to accepted and respected standards.

•

It uses the recurring structures, linguistic patterns, and metaphors of the 1979 Book of Common
Prayer.

•

It is formal, not casual, conversational, or colloquial.

•

It is dense enough to bear the weight of the sacred purpose for which it is intended.

•

It is metaphoric without being obtuse.

•

It is performative: that is, it effects what it says.

At the same time, these rites must resonate as natural speech in contemporary ears. A religious or sacred
tone must be achieved without the use of arcane or antiquated words or patterns of speech.
The rites should provide explanatory notes and rubrics. The material must be considered as the script for an
event, not merely a collection of texts.
Any rite of blessing must be an expression primarily of the entire Church, not of the couple seeking a
blessing. These rites must allow for robust communal participation, reflecting the baptismal ecclesiology of
the Prayer Book. Related to this, since the eucharist is the symbol of the unity of the Church through unity
with Christ, these services of blessing should normatively take place within a celebration of the eucharist.
Such rites must enact the notion of sacramental reciprocity by suggesting that, even as the Church blesses
the relationship of the couple, the relationship of the couple is a blessing to the Church.
Options for various elements of the rites, particularly Scripture and the Prayers of the People, must be
provided so that this action of the entire Church—this common prayer—does not degenerate into a generic
rite.
Any rite of blessing a couple must hold up the two people making the covenant as the primary ministers
within this action of God and of the entire Church. Such rites should give expression to the Church’s
understanding that the couple is freely assuming a vocation that can be expected to yield the fruits of
mutual fidelity for the couple, for the Church, and for the entire world, and that points ultimately toward the
fulfillment of all human relationships and unity in the eschatological Reign of God, when God will be all-in-all.
The rites must be what they purport to be—liturgical prayer—not didactic or polemical statements in the
guise of liturgy.
Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music 2010

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

129 of 158

VII. APPENDICES

Contents
1. A History of the Marriage Canon
2. Marriage Canons
3. A Review of General Convention Legislation
4. Consultation on Same-Sex Marriage: Executive Summary of Evaluations
5. Glossary of Legal and Canonical Terms

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

130 of 158

1. A History of the Marriage Canon
This essay is from the report submitted to the 78th General Convention by the Task Force on the Study of Marriage,
which was formed by the 77th General Convention (2012).

Canonical history in the Episcopal Church is consistent in one respect: canons follow practice. That is, the
Church changes and evolves its practice and then amends the canons to reflect the current practice.1
Sometimes this happens relatively quickly (for example, in the case of the ordination of women); sometimes
this happens slowly (as in the case of the Church’s practices regarding divorce and remarriage). In either
case, a review of the journals of General Convention and White and Dykman’s The Annotated Constitution
and Canons shows that oftentimes the discussion has taken place over a number of years before the
amendment passes General Convention. The marriage canon has followed this norm.
It should be noted that the term “Holy Matrimony  may appear to be used interchangeably with marriage.
Holy Matrimony is not defined but in usage refers to the sacramental rite of the Church, and some prefer its
use in the context of the Church’s relationship to weddings and marriage. The connotation of “Holy
Matrimony  is something more than marriage as defined by civil law. That “something more  is expressed in
covenant language: the exchange of vows in the presence of a priest and at least two witnesses and blessed
in the Name of God. Yet the marriage rite in the Book of Common Prayer 1979 is titled “The Celebration and
Blessing of a Marriage.  And both civil and Church law talks of “solemnizing  marriage. Even if Holy
Matrimony is understood as “something more,  that understanding is more aspirational than real, as
marriage in the Church is no guarantee of the success of the relationship.
The canons addressing marriage or Holy Matrimony first addressed not the making of the marriage but its
dissolution. The first mention of marriage in the canons2 of the Episcopal Church appears in the Convention
of 1808. The House of Deputies referred a communication to the House of Bishops, then consisting of the
two bishops in attendance, White and Claggett, making a request. The communication asked the bishops to
consider adopting the English canon regarding marriage and inserting it into future editions of the Prayer
Book. The bishops responded by deferring the matter to consideration and action by a future convention,
pointing to the absence of some of their members, as well as absences among the deputies. The 1808
convention instead passed a joint resolution stating “the sense of this Church  regarding the remarriage of
the divorced, declaring “it is inconsistent with the law of God, and the Ministers of this Church, therefore,
shall not unite in matrimony any person who is divorced, unless it be on account of the other party having
been guilty of adultery. 3
This joint resolution of 1808 remained the only statement of the General Convention on the subject of
marriage until 1868, when the first canon was enacted as Canon II.13:
No minister of this Church shall solemnize Matrimony in any case where there is a divorced
wife or husband of either party still living; but this Canon shall not be held to apply to the
innocent party in a divorce for the cause of adultery, or to parties once divorced seeking to
be united again.
1
There are other instances when amending the canons was intended to change the practice. A recent example is the serial revisions
of Title IV between 1994 and 2009.
2
The Constitution of the Episcopal Church has not historically addressed marriage. The discussion here is confined to the canons.
3
Edwin A. White and Jackson A. Dykman, eds., Annotated Constitution and Canons for the Government of the Protestant Episcopal
Church (New York: Church Publishing, Inc., 1979) , 398.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

131 of 158

The new canon restated what the joint resolution of 1808 had put forward: remarriage of a divorced person
is allowed only when the divorce occurs because of the adultery of one of the partners and then only of the
innocent partner. It also adds a clarifying statement that allows a divorced couple to reunite and remarry in
the Church. This statement regarding divorce and remarriage relied on what is commonly called “the
Matthean exception,  referring to Matthew 5:32: “But I say to you that anyone who divorces his wife,
except on the ground of unchastity, causes her to commit adultery; and whoever marries a divorced woman
commits adultery.  Allowing this exception to the general prohibition of remarriage of a divorced person
while the other partner lived was an Episcopal Church step away from the Church of England’s blanket ban
on remarriage of divorced persons.4
The 1877 convention repealed Canon II.13 as it was enacted in 1868 and enacted a new version entitled “Of
Marriage and Divorce :
•

Section 1 declared unlawful any marriage “otherwise than as God’s Word doth allow. 

•

Section 2 prohibited ministers from knowingly solemnizing, after due inquiry, the marriage of any
divorced person whose spouse is alive, if divorced for cause arising after marriage, and retains
the exception for the innocent spouse or divorced spouses seeking to reunite.

•

Section 3 prevented reception of a person not married according to the Word of God and the
discipline of this Church into Baptism, Confirmation, or Holy Communion without the “godly
judgment  of the bishop. But no minister could refuse the sacraments to a penitent person in
imminent danger of death.

•

Section 4 required referral of the facts of any case arising under section 2 to the bishop of the
diocese or missionary jurisdiction in which the case arose, or, in the absence of such a bishop, to
a bishop designated by the Standing Committee. The bishop was empowered to make inquiry
into the matter as he found expedient and then deliver a judgment. No guidelines are given to
serve as the basis for entering judgment.

•

Section 5 applies the new canon only prospectively as to any penalties that may attach.5

The House of Bishops had concurred with the amendments in 1874 but the House of Deputies deferred
consideration until the next convention in 1877. The 1868 amendments applied only to clergy, while the 1877
revision added penalties for laity by excluding from the sacraments those who married outside the Church.
Divorce rates remained low in the 1800s because secular law and social norms made divorce difficult.
Spouses had to prove fault in some manner to obtain a divorce. Women, alone or with children, had few
options for economic survival, a deterrent to seeking divorce. Divorce statistics were not even recorded
prior to 1867. Less than 10 percent of marriages ended in divorce between 1867 and 1900. Nonetheless, the
Church wrestled with how it should respond to its members who divorced. The idea of divorce ran counter
to Church values and ideas about marriage, but it played out in how the Church responded to its divorced
members. The Church’s response came in the language of punishment: of clergy for knowingly officiating at
the marriage a person who was divorced from a living spouse, and of laity who divorced and remarried.
The convention of 1883 appointed a joint committee of bishops and deputies “to consider the duty of the
Church in relation to the whole subject of Marriage, including the impediments to the contract thereof, the
manner of its solemnization, and the conditions of its dissolution, and to report to the next General
Convention. 6 In their report to the 1886 convention the committee contrasted the traditional view held by
the Church with the prevailing secular sentiment seeking easier separation. The cause was identified as the
ease with which first marriages were contracted, noting that children as young as twelve could marry without
parental consent and without witnesses. The committee’s response was a proposed canon that featured:
4

White & Dykman, 398–399.
White & Dykman, 400–401.
6
White & Dykman, 402.
5

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

132 of 158

•

Setting eighteen as the minimum age to marry without parental consent.

•

Requiring solemnization to occur in the presence of at least two witnesses personally acquainted
with both parties.

•

Requiring clergy to keep a register of marriages, recording certain facts, and signed by the
parties, at least two witnesses and the minister.

•

Setting the law of the Church concerning divorce as that contained in Matthew 5:32 and 19:9,
Mark 10:1, and Luke 16:18.

•

Prohibiting divorce except for adultery or fornication, with the unfaithful spouse prohibited from
marrying again during the lifetime of the innocent spouse.

•

Subjecting clergy who violate the canon to ecclesiastical trial and admonition for a first offense
and suspension or deposition for repeat offenses.

•

Barring spouses from receiving Holy Communion for violating the canon except upon repentance
and after separation from the new spouse.

The House of Deputies declined to concur in the adoption of the proposed canon, which was referred to the
next conventions of 1889, 1892, 1895, and 1901 with similar results.7
The convention of 1904 took up the proposal to revise the marriage canon and passed Canon 38, “Of
Solemnization of Matrimony,  by a narrow majority after four days of debate in the House of Deputies
meeting as a committee of the whole. Canon 38 set the following requirements:
•

Section 1 required ministers to observe the law of the state governing the civil contract of
marriage in the place where the marriage was performed.

•

Section 2 required the presence of at least two witnesses to the solemnization and the recording
in the proper register of the name, age, and residence of each party, signed by the parties, the
minister, and at least two witnesses.

•

Section 3 prohibited minister, knowingly and after due inquiry, from officiating at the marriage
any person who was divorced from a living spouse, except the innocent party to a divorce for
adultery. It added the new requirements in the latter case of a one-year waiting period and
presentation of the divorce decree and record with “satisfactory evidence touching on the facts
of the case  to the ecclesiastical authority along with evidence that the opposing spouse was
personally served or appeared in court. The ecclesiastical authority, after taking legal advice on
the evidence, declared in writing that in his judgment the case of the applicant conformed to the
requirements of the canon. It further allowed any minister as a matter of discretion to decline to
solemnize any marriage.

•

Section 4 authorized any minister to refuse the ordinances of Holy Baptism, Confirmation, or
Holy Communion to anyone who has been married “otherwise than as the Word of God and
discipline of this Church allow  until the case was presented to the ecclesiastical authority for his
godly judgment. But no minister was to refuse the sacraments to a penitent person in danger of
death.

As adopted, the canon represented a compromise, one that had eluded the General Convention for fifteen
years, between those who would prohibit remarriage of persons divorced from a still-living former spouse,
and those who advocated the limited adultery exception, previously enacted in 1868, for the so-called
innocent spouse in a divorce for adultery.8
Efforts to drop the adultery exception continued without success in the conventions of 1910 and 1913, when
the question was referred to a joint committee on marriage. The committee’s report to the 1916 convention
7
8

White & Dykman, 402–403.
White & Dykman, 403–404.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

133 of 158

argued for the exercise of discretion in excluding persons from the sacraments, recognizing that a
subsequent marriage may have been entered into in good faith and in ignorance of the Church’s law or while
not subject to the Church’s discipline, or may result in the break-up of a family. This discretion would lie with
the minister of the congregation and the bishop of the diocese. The proposed canonical amendments failed
in 1916 and 1919.
A number of changes in American social and economic structures from 1850 to 1920 kept the Church’s
discussions of the role of divorce and remarriage going. The Industrial Revolution drew men and women
from rural communities to the cities, from kinship community to a community of peers, and began to
redefine the roles of men and women. Women organized to advocate for their civil rights in 1848 after the
all-male Liberty Party added suffrage for women to its national platform. A month later, the Seneca Falls
Convention met and adopted a “Declaration of Sentiments  demanding rights for women so that they could
protect their homes and families. Among the rights sought were equal treatment before the law,
participation in the government of both State and Church, the right to own, inherit, and dispose of their
property, and fair treatment in divorce. The Women’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) organized in
1874, seeking to ban alcohol, and later tobacco and other drugs, in order to protect the home. Women
protested their lack of civil rights and sought the rights that would treat them as adults in the eyes of the
law, as opposed to the legal protections that kept them dependent on their fathers, husbands, and sons.
Unable to vote, women, especially married women, lacked legal rights to retain custody of children and
control of their own property in a divorce, legal protection against rape and other assaults, including
domestic violence, and access to the economy to become self-supporting when they were widowed or
divorced. The institutions of that time were controlled by white men. Legislatures were all male. Women
faced juries of men in civil and criminal cases. The Church reflected its times: only men could be ordained as
clergy and only men could serve on vestries and as deputies to General Convention. The WCTU obtained
passage of Prohibition with the 18th Amendment to the federal Constitution in 1920, subsequently repealed
in 1933 in response to the uneven application of the law across economic class and in the face of widespread
and open disregard for a law with a raft of unintended consequences. In short, Prohibition was unworkable.
But women obtained the right to vote in 1920 with ratification of the 19th Amendment.
Women’s roles in society continued to change with the Depression and World War II. Divorce rates increased
in the early twentieth century, doubling from 8 percent in 1900 to 16 percent in 1930. Divorce continued to
be fault-based divorce codes which required proof of abuse, adultery, or abandonment. Divorce rates
dropped slightly during the Great Depression, in part because couples could not afford the economic
consequences of divorce on top of unemployment. As the unemployment rate dropped, divorce rates began
to rise gradually. By 1940, 20 percent of marriages ended in divorce. Fertility rates increased immediately
following World War I, but then resumed a fifty-year decline which was slowed only by the unreliability of
available birth control.9
The General Convention of 1922 amended section 3 of Canon 38, making it unlawful for any member of the
Church to enter into a marriage when either of the parties was divorced from a living husband or wife. The
convention of 1925 considered and rejected an amendment to section 3 of Canon 38 that restricted
remarriage to cases where the bishop, acting with legal advice, found on the record that the divorce was
granted for cause arising before marriage, essentially annulling the marriage, allowing remarriage of either
party. The House of Bishops considered a separate amendment that allowed remarriage of either party of
any divorce, abolishing the Matthean exception. The proposal failed, and the Matthean exception survived.
The Joint Commission on Marriage and Divorce presented an extensive revision of the marriage canon that
was adopted in 1931. Compared with the previous limited measures to regulate the solemnization of
marriage by the Church, the new Canon 41, “Of the Solemnization of Holy Matrimony,  enacted far more
detailed regulation of Church marriage:

9

Stephanie Coontz, Marriage, A History: How Love Conquered Marriage (New York: Penguin, 2005).

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

134 of 158

•

Section 1 for the first time stated an affirmative duty that clergy instruct their congregations,
both publicly and privately, on the nature and responsibilities of Holy Matrimony, and the mutual
love and forbearance required.

•

Section 2 retained the 1904 admonition that ministers conform to the laws of the State
governing civil marriage, and added a parallel admonition to conform to the laws of the Church
regarding the solemnization of Holy Matrimony.

•

Section 3 expanded to five the list of conditions that the minister must discern before
solemnizing a marriage. Among the new conditions were verifying that the parties had a right to
contract a marriage under Church law; instructing the parties on “the nature of Holy Matrimony,
its responsibilities, and the means of grace which God has provided through His Church ; and
requiring the parties to give the minister at least three days’ notice of their intent to marry.
Requirements for at least two witnesses and entry into the parish register were retained.

•

Section 4 added a new requirement that the parties to an imperiled marriage must present the
matter to the minister who has “the duty ... to labor that the parties may be reconciled. 

•

Section 5 retained the 1904 process and expectations for the remarriage of the divorced.

•

Section 6 added new provisions and conditions for the annulment or dissolution of a marriage by
reason of the presence of one of the listed impediments to the marriage: relationship by blood
within the prohibited degree (consanguinity within first cousins); absence of free consent;
mistake as to the identity of either party; mental deficiency affecting exercise of intelligent
choice; insanity of either party; failure of a party to reach puberty; undisclosed impotence,
venereal disease, or facts making the marriage bigamous. Section 6 added a role for the
ecclesiastical court in the exercise of judgments on annulment or dissolution petitions as an
alternative to presentation to the bishop. A further provision stated that no judgment was to be
construed as addressing the legitimacy of children or the civil validity of the relationship.

•

Section 7 retained the 1904 provision for excluding from the sacraments persons not married
“according to the word of God and discipline of this Church  and the process for review by the
bishop. Section 7 added an additional process for admitting persons married by civil authority or
“otherwise than as this Church provides  to the sacraments. The process involved judgment by
the bishop or ecclesiastical court.

Two of the 1931 proposals were subject to debate and amendment. The Joint Commission’s proposal did not
include continuing recognition of the Matthean exception, which was added back by the convention. The
second major change, removing the right of determining nullity of a marriage from the local clergy to the
bishop or ecclesiastical court, has an unclear basis but a best guess is that clergy were thought to be too
lenient with their congregants. Requiring the bishop to make the determination opened the door to more
uniform results and more objective consideration. One additional significant change was the omission of the
section 3 clause that permitted any minister in his own discretion to decline to solemnize any marriage.10
The 1934 convention modified the three days’ notice requirement to allow the minister to waive “for
weighty cause,  when one of the parties was a member of the minister’s congregation or was well known to
the minister, facts which had to be reported immediately to the ecclesiastical authority.11
The report of the Joint Commission on Marriage and Divorce to the 1937 General Convention lamented that
the Church’s views on divorce and marriage were increasingly ignored by the Church as well as the public at
large. To remedy this concern, the Commission made observations about the points of tension, noting that

10
11

White & Dykman, 406–408.
White & Dykman, 408.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

135 of 158

“almost everyone agrees that the present Canon is inadequate, but there is a wide difference of opinion as
to the course that should be followed. 12 The report went on to identify three issues:
•

Some are slow to make changes, foreseeing difficulties and dangers and hence voting for the
status quo.

•

Others want to prohibit remarriage or the blessing of a remarriage of divorced persons, a
strategy that has failed.

•

Still others want to adopt annulment as done in the Eastern Orthodox and Roman churches,
observing that “to most Anglicans and Protestants this seems nothing but divorce under another
name. In either case it ‘puts asunder’ those whom, to all appearances and understanding ‘God
hath joined together.’ 

The Commission proposed only two minor changes to the impediments section of the canon which were
adopted, adding “lack of free and legal consent of either party  and “impotence or sexual perversion of
either party undisclosed to the other. 13 Sexual perversion would include homosexuality.
The Commission proposed more extensive revisions of the marriage canon in 1940 and 1943 without success,
receiving unfavorable action in the House of Deputies in a vote by orders. The 1943 convention passed
successfully a reorganization of canons related to marriage by transferring section 7 (1931), governing the
access of divorced persons to the sacraments, to Canon 15, “Of Regulations Respecting the Laity.  Section 4,
the duty to seek counseling; section 5, the Matthean exception to the prohibition of remarriage after
divorce; and section 6, annulment, dissolution, and the impediments to marriage, became a new Canon 17,
“Of Regulations Respecting Holy Matrimony and the Impediments Thereto.  And sections 1–3, telling
ministers their duties and obligations in solemnizing marriage, became the new Canon 16, “Of the
Solemnization of Holy Matrimony. 
After nearly eighty years of struggle, the 1946 convention eliminated the prohibition of the remarriage of
divorced persons, including the Matthean exception. Applying solely to active members in good standing,
the revised and renumbered Canon 18, “Of the Regulations Respecting Holy Matrimony,  allowed a person
whose marriage was annulled or dissolved by a civil court to petition the bishop or ecclesiastical authority of
the diocese of canonical residence for a judgment of status or permission to be married by a minister of this
Church. A one-year waiting period after issuance of the civil judgment was required and petition had to be
made at least thirty days before the planned date of marriage. In considering such a petition, the bishop was
required to be “satisfied that the parties intend a true Christian marriage,  and, if so finding, refer the
petition to his council of advisers or the court if the diocese has established one. The bishop or ecclesiastical
authority was to base the judgment on and conform with the doctrine of the Church, “that marriage is a
physical, spiritual, and mystical union of a man and a woman created by their mutual consent of heart, mind
and will thereto and is a Holy Estate instituted of God and is in intention lifelong.  Canon 18 references the
list of conditions in Canon 17 as forming the basis for the judgment of the ecclesiastical authority. The result
of the judgment is that no marriage bond recognized by the Church was established and may be so declared
by the proper authority. However, the judgment was held not to say anything about the legitimacy of
children or the civil viability of the former relationship. Judgments were to be rendered in writing and kept
as a permanent record of the diocese. Any person granted such a judgment could then be married by a
minister of the Church.14 Essentially the convention accepted remarriage of divorced members as
determined by civil law.
Controversy lingered over a perceived ambiguity in Canon 18, Section 2(b), whether the impediments listed
in Canon 17, section 2(b), “are shown to exist or to have existed which manifestly establish that no marriage
bond [existed].  Some bishops were only willing to consider granting petitions to remarry if the marriage
12

Joint Commission on Marriage and Divorce, quoted in White & Dykman, 409.
White & Dykman, 410; emphasis added.
14
White & Dykman, 416–418.
13

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

136 of 158

impediment arose before the marriage, a concept of contract law known as nullity ab initio, meaning that
some defect occurred in the formation of the marriage contract. Others were willing to recognize that for
causes arising after marriage the marriage bond dissolved. A special committee of the House of Bishops
reported to the 1949 convention on this split of opinion by taking the middle way opposing further
clarification, stating: “But as a matter of fact there is no ambiguity here. The Canon recognized two points of
view as legitimate; one, that if one or more impediments existed before the marriage, no marital bond was
created; the other, that if one of the impediments arises after marriage, the marital bond is broken.  The
bishops could have it both ways.15
The 1946 revision changed the requirement that both parties have received Holy Baptism to requiring that
only one party be baptized. The change addressed a disagreement in interpretation that had arisen. Some
clergy felt that the nature of Holy Matrimony implied its availability only to baptized persons. This
interpretation pushed unbaptized parties to seek instruction and Holy Baptism before being married in the
Church, as some clergy refused to solemnize the marriage otherwise. This view is rejected by requiring at
least one party to have been baptized.16
The 1949 convention nonetheless made two changes:
•

Removed the referral by the bishop to his council of advisers or to a court formed for that
purpose.

•

Added the requirement that, if the remarriage was to be solemnized in a different jurisdiction
than where the judgment is granted, the bishop or ecclesiastical authority of the second
jurisdiction had to give approval as well.

These changes left the granting of permission to remarry to the bishop or ecclesiastical authority, without
requiring consultation with attorneys, psychologists, a council of advice, or an ecclesiastical court, as had
been required in prior times.
Proposals to return to the principle of nullity ab initio (1958) and to shorten the one-year waiting period
(1970) were defeated.
From 1945 to 1947, a distinct spike in divorce rates was evident in the aftermath of World War II, reaching 43
percent when compared to the number of marriages in 1946. There may have been many reasons for this
rise: hasty marriages immediately before deployment to the war, newfound independence among wives on
the home front, and inability to undertake the burden of sustaining marriages to returning war veterans who
were injured physically or psychologically as a result of their service. Divorce rates leveled off in the 1950s
and 1960s, averaging about 24 percent over the two decades.
As General Convention prepared to convene in 1973, bishops and deputies submitted from 30 to 40
resolutions calling for amending or repealing the canons on Holy Matrimony. Both houses appointed special
committees that met jointly during the first week of the convention, came to agreement on major issues,
and drew up proposed amendments to the canons which were adopted by considerable majorities without
significant floor changes.
•

Canon I.16, “Of Regulations Respecting the Laity,  was amended to repeal section 7 addressing a
Minister’s withholding of the sacraments from a person “married otherwise than as the word of
God and discipline of this Church allow .

•

Canon I.17, “Of the Solemnization of Holy Matrimony,  was repealed and a new canon adopted
in its place.


15
16

Section 1 was retained, requiring clergy to conform to state law governing civil marriage and
the laws of this Church governing Holy Matrimony.

White & Dykman, 419, quoting the 1949 Journal, 439.
White & Dykman, 414.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

137 of 158




•

Sections 2 and 3 required clergy to meet the conditions and follow the procedures in
solemnizing any marriage. The list of impediments to marriage was eliminated in an effort to
move clergy from a legalistic evaluation of the marriage to a more pastoral approach
emphasizing the nature of Christian marriage. The clergy were required to instruct and
ascertain the understanding of the parties that marriage is a physical and spiritual union
entered into in the community of faith by mutual consent of heart, mind, and will intending
to be a lifelong commitment. Further, the parties must satisfy the minister that they are
entering into marriage without fraud, coercion, mistaken identity, or mental reservation.
Section 3 procedures requiring thirty days’ notice to the minister, presence of at least two
witnesses, and recording the marriage in the proper register were retained, as was the
requirement that the couple sign the “Declaration of Intent  contained in section 3(d), which
was first introduced into the canon in 1949. The Declaration of Intent was connected to the
required instruction, but it sounded, in fact, more like a confessional statement expressed as
the couple’s “understanding  of Christian marriage.
Section 4 retained the clergy’s discretion to decline to perform any marriage.

Canon I.18, “Of Regulations Respecting Holy Matrimony: Concerning Preservation of Marriage,
Dissolution of Marriage, and Remarriage,  was repealed and a new canon adopted:







Section 1 addressed the duty of the parties and the minister to attempt reconciliation in the
face of imperiled marriage unity before filing legal action.
Section 2 allowed a party who wished to remarry after receiving a civil decree of annulment
or dissolution to petition the bishop or ecclesiastical authority for a judgment of nullity or
termination. The requirements for this permission were streamlined from earlier versions.
Reliance on a civil decree of annulment or dissolution continued.
Section 3 set out procedures for the minister to follow in preparation for solemnizing the
marriage of a party who was previously married to a living spouse. As revised, section 3 made
clear that divorced persons could remarry in the Church and set out the simplified
procedures for ministers to follow and obtain the bishop’s consent.
Section 4 makes Canon I.17 applicable to all remarriages.17

No-fault divorce arrived in the 1970s as states changed their laws to move away from the necessity of
proving a grievous wrong to the marriage and toward recognition that marital relationships simply do not
work out or meet the expectations of both parties. In the 1980s equitable distribution of marital property
became the law, reducing the battles between divorcing spouses over property as a means of punishing the
other or reducing an offending spouse to abject poverty. Divorce rates jumped from 33 percent in 1970 to 50
percent in 1985 as these two legal trends took hold nationwide. Divorce rates continue to run to about 50
percent of marriages in 2014.
The 1973 rewrites of Canons I.16, I.17 and I.18, renumbered as Canons I.17, I.18 and I.19 in 1985, settled the
canons on marriage and remarriage for the next thirty years. There have been a few relatively minor changes
adopted subsequently:

17

•

In 1979, Canon I.18.3 (now I.19.3) was amended to clarify which bishop would be consulted when
a member of the clergy canonically resident in one diocese was licensed to perform a remarriage
in another diocese. The canon required consulting with and reporting to the minister’s bishop.

•

In 2000, Canon I.19.1 was amended to clarify the duty of clergy when consulted by the parties to
an imperiled marriage. The prior canon emphasized reconciliation as the purpose of the
consultation. Some clergy apparently took this charge literally, encouraging women in abusive
relationships to work matters out without regard to the physical safety of the woman and/or

White & Dykman, 413–415.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

138 of 158

children. Societal, legal, and law enforcement norms regarding domestic violence, spousal abuse,
and child abuse changed significantly during the 1980s and 1990s. The amendment changed the
charge to reconcile if possible and imposed an additional duty on the clergy to “act first to
protect and promote the physical and emotional safety of those involved and only then, if
possible, to labor that the parties be reconciled. 
•

In 2000, General Convention further amended Canon I.19.3 to add reporting to the bishop of the
diocese where the member of the clergy is canonically resident or the bishop where the member
of the clergy is licensed to officiate and report to that bishop on the remarriage.

Even though the marriage canons did not change dramatically, discussion of issues related to marriage
continued in General Convention in parallel with secular society. These discussions occurred under the
umbrella of human sexuality and across interim bodies of the General Convention, debating what the Church
should say and do about premarital sex and adultery; infertility and emerging technologies to allow infertile
couples to conceive and bear children and surrogacy; abortion and birth control; couples cohabiting without
marriage; marriage across religious denominations; interracial marriage; and full inclusion of gay and lesbian,
later widened to include bisexual and transgender persons (LGBT), in community. Calls continue for revision
of the canons to permit same-sex marriage or some form of recognition for same-sex relationships; to
remove clergy from acting as agents of the state in solemnizing marriage; to allow blessings for same-sex
couples, heterosexual couples who choose not to marry for financial reasons, and immigrants living illegally
in the United States. These issues will be considered further in the critique of the present canons.

Bibliography
The Constitution and Canons of the Episcopal Church. New York: Church Publishing Inc., 2012.
Coontz, Stephanie. Marriage, A History: How Love Conquered Marriage. New York: Penguin, 2005.
Jones, Audrey M. “Historical Divorce Rate Statistics,  on website Love to Know Divorce.
http://divorce.lovetoknow.com/Historical_Divorce_Rate_Statistics.
National Conference of State Legislatures. “Same-Sex Marriage Laws.  November 20, 2014.
http://www.ncsl.org/research/human-services/same-sex-marriage-laws.aspx#2.
White, Edwin A., and Jackson A. Dykman, eds. Annotated Constitution and Canons for the Government of the
Protestant Episcopal Church. New York: Church Publishing, Inc., 1979.
Women’s Christian Temperance Union website. “Early History.  http://www.wctu.org/earlyhistory.html.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

139 of 158

2. Marriage Canons
From The Episcopal Church, Constitution and Canons, 2015
In Resolution 2015-A036, the General Convention revised Canon I.18, effective on the First Sunday of Advent 2015.

TITLE I:
ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION
Canon 18: Of the Celebration and Blessing of Marriage
Sec. 1. Every Member of the Clergy of this Church shall conform to the laws of the State governing the
creation of the civil status of marriage, and also these canons concerning the solemnization
of marriage. Members of the Clergy may solemnize a marriage using any of the liturgical forms authorized by
this Church.
Sec. 2. The couple shall notify the Member of the Clergy of their intent to marry at least thirty days prior to
the solemnization; Provided, that if one of the parties is a member of the Congregation of the Member of
the Clergy, or both parties can furnish satisfactory evidence of the need for shortening the time, this
requirement can be waived for weighty cause; in which case the Member of the Clergy shall immediately
report this action in writing to the Bishop.
Sec. 3. Prior to the solemnization, the Member of the Clergy shall determine:
(a) that both parties have the right to marry according to the laws of the State and consent to do so
freely, without fraud, coercion, mistake as to the identity of either, or mental reservation; and
(b) that at least one of the parties is baptized; and
(c) that both parties have been instructed by the Member of the Clergy, or a person known by the
Member of the Clergy to be competent and responsible, in the nature, purpose, and meaning, as well as the
rights, duties and responsibilities of marriage.
Sec. 4. Prior to the solemnization, the parties shall sign the following Declaration of Intention:
We understand the teaching of the church that God’s purpose for our marriage is for our mutual joy, for the
help and comfort we will give to each other in prosperity and adversity, and, when it is God’s will, for the gift
and heritage of children and their nurture in the knowledge and love of God. We also understand that our
marriage is to be unconditional, mutual, exclusive, faithful, and lifelong; and we engage to make the utmost
effort to accept these gifts and fulfill these duties, with the help of God and the support of our community.
Sec. 5. At least two witnesses shall be present at the solemnization, and together with the Member of the
Clergy and the parties, sign the record of the solemnization in the proper register; which record shall include
the date and place of the solemnization, the names of the witnesses, the parties and their parents, the age
of the parties, Church status, and residence(s).
Sec. 6. A bishop or priest may pronounce a blessing upon a civil marriage using any of the liturgical forms
authorized by this Church.
Sec. 7. It shall be within the discretion of any Member of the Clergy of this Church to decline to solemnize or
bless any marriage.
CANON 19: Of Regulations Respecting Holy Matrimony:

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

140 of 158

Concerning Preservation of Marriage, Dissolution of Marriage, and Remarriage
Sec. 1. When marital unity is imperiled by dissension, it shall be the duty, if possible, of either or both parties,
before taking legal action, to lay the matter before a Member of the Clergy; it shall be the duty of such
Member of the Clergy to act first to protect and promote the physical and emotional safety of those
involved and only then, if it be possible, to labor that the parties may be reconciled.
Sec. 2 (a) Any member of this Church whose marriage has been annulled or dissolved by a civil court may
apply to the Bishop or Ecclesiastical Authority of the Diocese in which such person is legally or canonically
resident for a judgment as to his or her marital status in the eyes of the Church. Such judgment may be a
recognition of the nullity, or of the termination of the said marriage; Provided, that no such judgment shall
be construed as affecting in any way the legitimacy of children or the civil validity of the former relationship.
(b) Every judgment rendered under this Section shall be in writing and shall be made a matter of
permanent record in the Archives of the Diocese.
Sec. 3. No Member of the Clergy of this Church shall solemnize the marriage of any person who has been the
husband or wife of any other person then living, nor shall any member of this Church enter into a marriage
when either of the contracting parties has been the husband or the wife of any other person then living,
except as hereinafter provided:
(a) The Member of the Clergy shall be satisfied by appropriate evidence that the prior marriage has been
annulled or dissolved by a final judgment or decree of a civil court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) The Member of the Clergy shall have instructed the parties that continuing concern must be shown
for the well-being of the former spouse, and of any children of the prior marriage.
(c) The Member of the Clergy shall consult with and obtain the consent of the Bishop of the Diocese
wherein the Member of the Clergy is canonically resident or the Bishop of the Diocese in which the Member
of the Clergy is licensed to officiate prior to, and shall report to that Bishop, the solemnization of any
marriage under this Section.
(d) If the proposed marriage is to be solemnized in a jurisdiction other than the one in which the consent
has been given, the consent shall be affirmed by the Bishop of that jurisdiction.
Sec. 4. All provisions of Canon I.18 shall, in all cases, apply.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

141 of 158

3. A Review of
General Convention Legislation

Introduction
The legislative history here shows the development of General Convention deliberations about the place of
gay men and lesbians in the life of the Church, particularly with regard to the blessing of their faithful,
monogamous, lifelong relationships. Successive conventions have both acknowledged the work of their
predecessors and reached new decisions.
Resolution texts are from the website of the Archives of the Episcopal Church:
http://www.episcopalarchives.org/e-archives/acts/.
Minneapolis, 1976: For the first time, General Convention adopted a resolution that acknowledged and
affirmed the presence of persons of homosexual orientation in the Church.
Resolution 1976–A069:
Resolved, the House of Bishops concurring, That it is the sense of this General Convention
that homosexual persons are children of God who have a full and equal claim with all other
persons upon the love, acceptance, and pastoral concern and care of the Church.
Anaheim, 1985: General Convention reaffirmed the 1976 resolution and encouraged dioceses to deepen
understanding.
Resolution 1985–D082:
Resolved, the House of Bishops concurring, That the 68th General Convention urge each
diocese of this Church to find an effective way to foster a better understanding of
homosexual persons, to dispel myths and prejudices about homosexuality, to provide
pastoral support, and to give life to the claim of homosexual persons “upon the love,
acceptance, and pastoral care and concern of the Church  as recognized by the General
Convention in 1976.
Phoenix, 1991: General Convention affirmed the traditional understanding of marriage as between a man and
a woman, and acknowledged “discontinuity  between that teaching and the experience of many members
of the Episcopal Church.
Resolution 1991–A104:
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That the 70th General Convention of the
Episcopal Church affirms that the teaching of the Episcopal Church is that physical sexual
expression is appropriate only within the lifelong monogamous “union of husband and wife
in heart, body, and mind  “intended by God for their mutual joy; for the help and comfort
given one another in prosperity and adversity and, when it is God’s will, for the procreation
of children and their nurture in the knowledge and love of the Lord  as set forth in the Book
of Common Prayer; and be it further
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

142 of 158

Resolved, That this Church continues to work to reconcile the discontinuity between this
teaching and the experience of many members of this body; and be it further
Resolved, That this General Convention confesses our failure to lead and to resolve this
discontinuity through legislative efforts based upon resolutions directed at singular and
various aspects of these issues; and be it further
Resolved, That this General Convention commissions the Bishops and members of each
Diocesan Deputation to initiate a means for all congregations in their jurisdiction to enter
into dialogue and deepen their understanding of these complex issues; and further this
General Convention directs the President of each Province to appoint one Bishop, one lay
deputy and one clerical deputy in that province to facilitate the process, to receive reports
from the dioceses at each meeting of their provincial synod and report to the 71st General
Convention; and be it further
Resolved, That this General Convention directs the House of Bishops to prepare a Pastoral
Teaching prior to the 71st General Convention using the learnings from the diocesan and
provincial processes and calling upon such insight as is necessary from theologians,
theological ethicists, social scientists and gay and lesbian persons; and that three lay persons
and three members of the clergy from the House of Deputies, appointed by the President of
the House of Deputies be included in the preparation of this Pastoral Teaching.
Indianapolis, 1994: General Convention added sexual orientation, along with marital status, sex, disabilities,
and age as categories to which non-discrimination in Church membership is assured.
Resolution 1994–C020:
Resolved, the House of Bishops concurring, That Title I, Canon 17, Section 5 be amended as
follows:
No person shall be denied rights, status [in], or [access to] an equal place in
the life, worship, and governance of this Church because of race, color, [or]
ethnic origin, national origin, marital status, sex, sexual orientation,
disabilities or age, except as otherwise specified by [this] Canon.
Indianapolis, 1994: General Convention called for a study of “the theological foundations and pastoral
considerations involved in the development of rites honoring love and commitment between persons of the
same sex. 
Resolution 1994–C042:
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That the 71st General Convention direct the
Standing Liturgical Commission and the Theology Committee of the House of Bishops to
prepare and present to the 72nd General Convention, as part of the Church’s ongoing
dialogue on human sexuality, a report addressing the theological foundations and pastoral
considerations involved in the development of rites honoring love and commitment between
persons of the same sex; and be it further
Resolved, That no rites for the honoring of love and commitment between persons of the
same sex be developed unless and until the preparation of such rites has been authorized by
the General Convention; and be it further
Resolved, That the sum of $8,600 be appropriated to support this work, subject to funding
considerations.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

143 of 158

Philadelphia, 1997: General Convention reaffirmed the traditional understanding of marriage and called for
continuing study.
Resolution 1997–C003:
Resolved, That this 72nd General Convention affirm the sacredness of Christian marriage
between one man and one woman with intent of life-long relationship; and be it further
Resolved, That this Convention direct the Standing Liturgical Commission to continue its
study of theological aspects of committed relationships of same-sex couples, and to issue a
full report including recommendations of future steps for the resolution of issues related to
such committed relationships no later than November 1999 for consideration at the 73rd
General Convention.
Denver, 2000: General Convention acknowledged relationships other than marriage.
Resolution 2000–D039:
Resolved, That the members of the 73rd General Convention intend for this Church to provide
a safe and just structure in which all can utilize their gifts and creative energies for mission;
and be it further
Resolved, That we acknowledge that while the issues of human sexuality are not yet
resolved, there are currently couples in the Body of Christ and in this Church who are living in
marriage and couples in the Body of Christ and in this Church who are living in other life-long
committed relationships; and be it further
Resolved, That we expect such relationships will be characterized by fidelity, monogamy,
mutual affection and respect, careful, honest communication, and the holy love which
enables those in such relationships to see in each other the image of God; and be it further
Resolved, That we denounce promiscuity, exploitation, and abusiveness in the relationships
of any of our members; and be it further
Resolved, That this Church intends to hold all its members accountable to these values, and
will provide for them the prayerful support, encouragement, and pastoral care necessary to
live faithfully by them; and be it further
Resolved, That we acknowledge that some, acting in good conscience, who disagree with the
traditional teaching of the Church on human sexuality, will act in contradiction to that
position; and be it further
Resolved, That in continuity with previous actions of the General Convention of this Church,
and in response to the call for dialogue by the Lambeth Conference, we affirm that those on
various sides of controversial issues have a place in the Church, and we reaffirm the
imperative to promote conversation between persons of differing experiences and
perspectives, while acknowledging the Church’s teaching on the sanctity of marriage.
Minneapolis, 2003: Acknowledging continuing differences, General Convention recognized “that local faith
communities are operating within the bounds of our common life as they explore and experience liturgies
celebrating and blessing same-sex unions. 
Resolution 2003–C051:
Resolved, That the 74th General Convention affirm the following:
1. That our life together as a community of faith is grounded in the saving work of Jesus
Christ and expressed in the principles of the Chicago–Lambeth Quadrilateral: Holy Scripture,

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

144 of 158

the historic Creeds of the Church, the two dominical Sacraments, and the Historic
Episcopate.
2. That we reaffirm Resolution A069 of the 65th General Convention (1976) that
“homosexual persons are children of God who have a full and equal claim with all other
persons upon the love, acceptance, and pastoral concern and care of the Church. 
3. That, in our understanding of homosexual persons, differences exist among us about how
best to care pastorally for those who intend to live in monogamous, non-celibate unions; and
what is, or should be, required, permitted, or prohibited by the doctrine, discipline, and
worship of The Episcopal Church concerning the blessing of the same.
4. That we reaffirm Resolution D039 of the 73rd General Convention (2000), that “We expect
such relationships will be characterized by fidelity, monogamy, mutual affection and respect,
careful, honest communication, and the holy love which enables those in such relationships
to see in each other the image of God,  and that such relationships exist throughout the
church.
5. That we recognize that local faith communities are operating within the bounds of our
common life as they explore and experience liturgies celebrating and blessing same-sex
unions.
6. That we commit ourselves, and call our church, in the spirit of Resolution A104 of the 70th
General Convention (1991), to continued prayer, study, and discernment on the pastoral care
for gay and lesbian persons, to include the compilation and development by a special
commission organized and appointed by the Presiding Bishop, of resources to facilitate as
wide a conversation of discernment as possible throughout the church.
7. That our baptism into Jesus Christ is inseparable from our communion with one another,
and we commit ourselves to that communion despite our diversity of opinion and, among
dioceses, a diversity of pastoral practice with the gay men and lesbians among us.
8. That it is a matter of faith that our Lord longs for our unity as his disciples, and for us this
entails living within the boundaries of the Constitution and Canons of The Episcopal Church.
We believe this discipline expresses faithfulness to our polity and that it will facilitate the
conversation we seek, not only in The Episcopal Church, but also in the wider Anglican
Communion and beyond.
Anaheim, 2009: The General Convention directed the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music to “collect
and develop theological and liturgical resources  for blessing same-gender relationships.
Resolution 2009–C056:
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That the 76th General Convention acknowledge
the changing circumstances in the United States and in other nations, as legislation
authorizing or forbidding marriage, civil unions or domestic partnerships for gay and lesbian
persons is passed in various civil jurisdictions that call forth a renewed pastoral response
from this Church, and for an open process for the consideration of theological and liturgical
resources for the blessing of same-gender relationships; and be it further
Resolved, That the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music, in consultation with the
House of Bishops, collect and develop theological and liturgical resources, and report to the
77th General Convention; and be it further
Resolved, That the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music, in consultation with the
House of Bishops, devise an open process for the conduct of its work inviting participation
from provinces, dioceses, congregations, and individuals who are engaged in such
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

145 of 158

theological work, and inviting theological reflection from throughout the Anglican
Communion; and be it further
Resolved, That bishops, particularly those in dioceses within civil jurisdictions where samegender marriage, civil unions, or domestic partnerships are legal, may provide generous
pastoral response to meet the needs of members of this Church; and be it further
Resolved, That this Convention honor the theological diversity of this Church in regard to
matters of human sexuality; and be it further
Resolved, That the members of this Church be encouraged to engage in this effort.
Indianapolis, 2012: In Resolution A049, the General Convention commended the resource “I Will Bless You,
and You Will Be a Blessing  for study and use, authorized the liturgy for provisional use, and called for a
process of review and further development of the theological resources. In addition, in Resolution A050, the
General Convention called for a task force to explore understandings of marriage, including attention to
legislation authorizing or forbidding same-sex marriage.
Resolution 2012–A049
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That the 77th General Convention commend
“Liturgical Resources I: I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing  for study and use in
congregations and dioceses of The Episcopal Church, with the following revisions:
Throughout “I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing  change “same-gender  to “samesex 
Blue Book p. 184: change “Resources for Blessing Same-Gender Relationships  to “Resources
for The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant in a Same-Sex Relationship 
Blue Book p. 240: Add rubric after first rubric, stating: “At least one of the couple must be a
baptized Christian. 
Blue Book p. 240: In paragraph 2, line 1, delete “at least one of whom is baptized 
Blue Book p. 241: In Presider’s address to the assembly, delete “come what may  (paragraph
1, line 9)
Blue Book pp. 241–242: In Presider’s address to the assembly, delete all of paragraph 2
(“Ahead of them ... calls us all to share. )
Blue Book p. 242: In Presider’s address to the assembly, change “let us pray, then, 
(paragraph 3, line 1) to “Therefore, in the name of Christ, let us pray. 
Blue Book p. 245: After the bidding for peace in their home and love in their family, add the
following bidding: “For the grace, when they hurt each other, to recognize and acknowledge
their fault, and to seek each other’s forgiveness and yours: Lord, in your mercy (or Lord, in
your goodness) Hear our prayer. 
Blue Book p. 246: Change rubric that begins “After a time of silence  to the following: “The
leader may add one or more of the following biddings. 
Blue Book p. 247: In Commitment (both forms) line 7, change “I will honor and keep you  to
“I will honor and love you 
Blue Book p. 248: In first form of blessing rings, change line 2 to “as signs of the enduring
covenant 
Blue Book p. 248: In Blessing of the Couple, add rubric between first and second paragraphs:
“The Presider continues with one of the following 

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

146 of 158

Blue Book p. 248: In Blessing of the Couple, add third paragraph after the “Amen : “or this /
God, the holy and undivided Trinity, bless, preserve, and keep you, and mercifully grant you
rich and boundless grace, that you may please God in body and soul. God make you a sign of
the loving-kindness and steadfast fidelity manifest in the life, death, and resurrection of our
Savior, and bring you at last to the delight of the heavenly banquet, where he lives and reigns
for ever and ever. Amen. 
Blue Book p. 257: In paragraph under E. Vocation, change “1 Samuel 18  to “1 Samuel 3 ; and
be it further
Resolved, That the 77th General Convention authorize for provisional use “The Witnessing
and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant  from “Liturgical Resources I: I Will Bless You and You
Will Be a Blessing  beginning the First Sunday of Advent 2012, under the direction and subject
to the permission of the bishop exercising ecclesiastical authority; and be it further
Resolved, That bishops, particularly those in dioceses within civil jurisdictions where same-sex
marriage, civil unions, or domestic partnerships are legal, may provide generous pastoral
response to meet the needs of members of this Church; and be it further
Resolved, That bishops may authorize adaptation of these materials to meet the needs of
members of this Church: and be it further
Resolved, that the provision of Canon I.18.4 applies by extension to “Theological Resources
for Blessing Same-Sex Relationships,  namely, “It shall be within the discretion of any
Member of the Clergy of this Church to decline to  preside at any rite of blessing defined
herein; and be it further
Resolved, That this convention honor the theological diversity of this church in regard to
matters of human sexuality, and that no bishop, priest, deacon or lay person should be
coerced or penalized in any manner, nor suffer any canonical disabilities, as a result of his or
her conscientious objection to or support for the 77th General Convention’s action with
regard to the Blessing of Same-Sex Relationships; and be it further
Resolved, That the theological resource for the blessing of a lifelong covenant be further
developed by the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music over the 2013–2015 triennium
with specific attention to further engagement with scripture and the relevant categories and
sources of systematic theology (e.g., creation, sin, grace, salvation, redemption, human
nature); and be it further
Resolved, That the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music include the work of diverse
theological perspectives in the further development of the theological resource; and be it
further
Resolved, That the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music develop an open process to
review “I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing,  inviting responses from provinces,
dioceses, congregations, and individuals from throughout The Episcopal Church and the
Anglican Communion, and from our ecumenical partners, and report to the 78th General
Convention.
Resolution 2012–A050
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That the 77th General Convention direct the
Presiding Bishop and President of the House of Deputies to appoint a task force of not more
than twelve people, consisting of theologians, liturgists, pastors, and educators, to identify
and explore biblical, theological, historical, liturgical, and canonical dimensions of marriage;
and be it further,
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

147 of 158

Resolved, That the task force consult with the Standing Commission on Constitution and
Canons and The Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music to address the pastoral need for
priests to officiate at a civil marriage of a same-sex couple in states that authorize such; and
be it further
Resolved, That the task force consult with couples living in marriage and in other lifelong
committed relationships and with single adults, and be it further,
Resolved, That the task force consult with other churches in the Anglican Communion and
with our ecumenical partners, and be it further
Resolved, That the task force consider issues raised by changing societal and cultural norms
and legal structures, including legislation authorizing or forbidding marriage, civil unions, or
domestic partnerships between two people of the same sex, in the U.S. and other countries
where The Episcopal Church is located; and be it further
Resolved, That the task force develop tools for theological reflection and norms for
theological discussion at a local level; and be it further
Resolved, That the task force report its progress to the 78th General Convention; and be it
further
Resolved, That the General Convention request the Joint Standing Committee on Program,
Budget and Finance to consider a budget allocation of $30,000 for the implementation of this
resolution.
Salt Lake City, 2015: In Resolution A054, the General Convention authorized two liturgies for marriage for
trial use and the use of “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Lifelong Covenant,  thus allowing the marriage of
same-sex couples in civil jurisdictions where such marriages are legal. In addition, Resolution A036 revised
the marriage canon (Canon I.18; the revised text appears above in Appendix 2), and Resolution A037
requested dioceses and parishes to use the study materials produced by the Task Force on the Study of
Marriage established by the 2012 Convention, and called for an expanded task force to continue to study
marriage.
Resolution 2015-A036:
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That Canon I.18 is hereby amended to read as follows:
CANON 18: Of the Solemnization of Holy Matrimony
Canon 18: Of the Celebration and Blessing of Marriage
Sec. 1. Every Member of the Clergy of this Church shall conform to the laws of the State governing
the creation of the civil status of marriage, and also to the laws of this Church governing these canons
concerning the solemnization of marriage Holy Matrimony. Members of the Clergy may solemnize a
marriage using any of the liturgical forms authorized by this Church.
Sec. 2. Before solemnizing a marriage the Member of the Clergy shall have ascertained:
(a) That both parties have the right to contract a marriage according to the laws of the State.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

148 of 158

(b) That both parties understand that Holy Matrimony is a physical and spiritual union of a man and a
woman, entered into within the community of faith, by mutual consent of heart, mind, and will, and
with intent that it be lifelong.
(c) That both parties freely and knowingly consent to such marriage, without fraud, coercion,
mistake as to identity of a partner, or mental reservation.
(d) That at least one of the parties has received Holy Baptism.
(e) That both parties have been instructed as to the nature, meaning, and purpose of Holy
Matrimony by the Member of the Clergy, or that they have both received such instruction from
persons known by the Member of the Clergy to be competent and responsible.
Sec. 2. The couple shall notify the Member of the Clergy of their intent to marry at least thirty days prior
to the solemnization; Provided, that if one of the parties is a member of the Congregation of the
Member of the Clergy, or both parties can furnish satisfactory evidence of the need for shortening the
time, this requirement can be waived for weighty cause; in which case the Member of the Clergy shall
immediately report this action in writing to the Bishop.
Sec. 3. No Member of the Clergy of this Church shall solemnize any marriage unless the following
procedures are complied with:
(a) The intention of the parties to contract marriage shall have been signified to the Member of the
Clergy at least thirty days before the service of solemnization; Provided, that for weighty cause, this
requirement may be dispensed with if one of the parties is a member of the Congregation of the
Member of the Clergy, or can furnish satisfactory evidence of responsibility. In case the thirty days'
notice is waived, the Member of the Clergy shall report such action in writing to the Bishop
immediately.
(b) There shall be present at least two witnesses to the solemnization of marriage.
(c) The Member of the Clergy shall record in the proper register the date and place of the marriage,
the names of the parties and their parents, the age of the parties, their residences, and their Church
status; the witnesses and the Member of the Clergy shall sign the record.
(d) The Member of the Clergy shall have required that the parties sign the following declaration:
(e) "We, A.B. and C.D., desiring to receive the blessing of Holy Matrimony in the Church, do solemnly
declare that we hold marriage to be a lifelong union of husband and wife as it is set forth in the Book
of Common Prayer.
(f) "We believe that the union of husband and wife, in heart, body, and mind, is intended by God for
their mutual joy; for the help and comfort given one another in prosperity and adversity; and, when it
is God's will, for the procreation of children and their nurture in the knowledge and love of the Lord.
(g) "And we do engage ourselves, so far as in us lies, to make our utmost effort to establish this
relationship and to seek God's help thereto."
Sec. 3. Prior to the solemnization, the Member of the Clergy shall determine:

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

149 of 158

(a) that both parties have the right to marry according to the laws of the State and consent to do so
freely, without fraud, coercion, mistake as to the identity of either, or mental reservation; and
(b) that at least one of the parties is baptized; and
(c) that both parties have been instructed by the Member of the Clergy, or a person known by the
Member of the Clergy to be competent and responsible, in the nature, purpose, and meaning, as well as
the rights, duties and responsibilities of marriage.
Sec. 4. Prior to the solemnization, the parties shall sign the following Declaration of Intention:
We understand the teaching of the church that God's purpose for our marriage is for our mutual joy, for
the help and comfort we will give to each other in prosperity and adversity, and, when it is God's will, for
the gift and heritage of children and their nurture in the knowledge and love of God. We also
understand that our marriage is to be unconditional, mutual, exclusive, faithful, and lifelong; and we
engage to make the utmost effort to accept these gifts and fulfill these duties, with the help of God and
the support of our community.
Sec. 5. At least two witnesses shall be present at the solemnization, and together with the Member of
the Clergy and the parties, sign the record of the solemnization in the proper register; which record shall
include the date and place of the solemnization, the names of the witnesses, the parties and their
parents, the age of the parties, Church status, and residence(s).
Sec. 6. A bishop or priest may pronounce a blessing upon a civil marriage using any of the liturgical
forms authorized by this Church.
Sec. 4Sec. 7. It shall be within the discretion of any Member of the Clergy of this Church to decline to
solemnize or bless any marriage.
and be it further
Resolved that this canon shall become effective on the First Sunday of Advent, 2015.

Resolution 2015-A037:
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That the 78th General Convention requests dioceses and
parishes use the study materials on marriage provided in the last triennium by the Task Force on the
Study of Marriage, namely the “Dearly Beloved  toolkit and the appended essays in their Blue Book
report to this Convention; and be it further
Resolved, That the 78th General Convention directs the Presiding Bishop and President of the House
of Deputies to appoint jointly an expanded Task Force on the Study of Marriage to continue this
work, consisting of not more than 15 people, including theologians, ethicists, pastors, liturgists, and
educators, who represent the cultural and theological diversity in the Church; membership should
include some of the Task Force on the Study of Marriage appointed in 2012, some from dioceses
outside the United States, and young adults; and be it further
Resolved, That the Task Force explore further those contemporary trends and norms identified by
the Task Force on the Study of Marriage in the previous triennium, specifically regarding those who
choose to remain single; unmarried persons in intimate relationships; couples who cohabitate either
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

150 of 158

in preparation for, or as an alternative to, marriage; couples who desire a blessing from the Church
but not marriage; parenting by single or and/or unmarried persons; differing forms of family and
household such as those including same-sex parenting, adoption, and racial diversity; and differences
in marriage patterns between ethnic and racial groups; and be it further
Resolved, That the Task Force consult with (i) individuals and couples within these groups about their
experience of faith and church life; and (ii) the results of diocesan and parochial study of "Dearly
Beloved" toolkit; and be it further
Resolved, That the Task Force explore biblical, theological, moral, liturgical, cultural, and pastoral
perspectives on these matters, and develop written materials about them which represent the
spectrum of understanding in our Church and which include responses from theologians, ethicists,
pastors, liturgists, social scientists, and educators who are not members of the expanded Task Force,
and whose perspectives represent the spectrum of understandings on these matters in our Church;
and be it further
Resolved, That the Task Force study and monitor, in consultation with the Standing Commission on
Liturgy and Music, the impact of same-sex marriage and rites of blessing on our Church; the
continuing debate about clergy acting as agents of the state in officiating at marriages; and any
other matters related to marriage by action of or referral by this Convention; and be it further
Resolved, That the Task Force report and make recommendations to the 79th General Convention;
and be it further
Resolved, That the Task Force provide educational and pastoral resources for congregational use on
these matters that represents the spectrum of understandings on these matters in our Church; and
be it further
Resolved, That the General Convention request the Joint Standing Committee on Program, Budget
and Finance to consider a budget allocation of $90,000 for the implementation of this resolution.
Resolution 2015-A054:
Resolved, the House of Deputies concurring, That the 78th General Convention commend “Liturgical
Resources I: I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing, Revised and Expanded 2015,  as found in the
Blue Book, Liturgy Supplemental Materials: Appendices of the Report of the Standing Commission
on Liturgy and Music (BBLSM), pp. 2-151, with the following revisions:
BBLSM p. 84: In The Commitment, change the rubric to read “Each member of the couple, in
turn, takes the right hand of the other and says 
BBLSM p.84: After “I N., give myself to you, N.  add “, and take you to myself. 
BBLSM p. 85: At the Pronouncement, change the rubric to read “The Presider joins the right
hands and says 
BBLSM p. 87: In Concerning the Service, change the second paragraph to read “At least one
of the couple must be a baptized Christian, and the marriage shall conform to the laws of the
state and canons of this church."
BBLSM p. 88: Under Gathering, change the rubric to read “The couple joins the assembly. 
BBLSM p. 89: Change “In marriage according to the laws of the state [or civil jurisdiction] of
X  to “In marriage [according to the laws of the state or civil jurisdiction of X] 

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

151 of 158

BBLSM p. 89: Change “Solemnize their marriage according to the laws of the state [or civil
jurisdiction] of X  to “are married [according to the laws of the state or civil jurisdiction of
X] 
BBLSM p.94: After “I N., give myself to you, N.  add “, and take you to myself. 
BBLSM p. 95: At the Pronouncement, change the rubric to read “The Presider joins the right
hands of the couple and says 
BBLSM p. 95: Replace “I pronounce that they are married according to the laws of the state
[or civil jurisdiction] of X  to “I pronounce that they are married [according to the laws of the
state or civil jurisdiction of X] 
BBLSM p. 100: At The Marriage, change the rubric to read “Each member of the couple, in
turn, takes the right hand of the other and says 
for study and use in congregations and dioceses of The Episcopal Church; and be it further
Resolved, That the 78th General Convention authorize for use “The Witnessing and Blessing of a
Lifelong Covenant  from “Liturgical Resources I: I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing, Revised
and Expanded 2015  (as found in Supplemental Materials: Appendices of the Report of the Standing
Commission on Liturgy and Music, pp. 77-86, as amended)  beginning the First Sunday of Advent
2015; under the direction and with the permission of the bishop exercising ecclesiastical authority;
and be it further
Resolved, That the 78th General Convention authorize for trial use in accordance with Article X of the
Constitution and Canon II.3.6 “The Witnessing and Blessing of a Marriage,  and “The Celebration and
Blessing of a Marriage 2,  from “Liturgical Resources I: I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing,
Revised and Expanded 2015  (as found in Supplemental Materials: Appendices of the Report of the
Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music, pp. 87-105) beginning the First Sunday of Advent
2015. Bishops exercising ecclesiastical authority or, where appropriate, ecclesiastical supervision will
make provision for all couples asking to be married in this Church to have access to these liturgies.
Trial use is only to be available under the direction and with the permission of the Diocesan Bishop;
and be it further
Resolved, That bishops may continue to provide generous pastoral response to meet the needs of
members of this Church; and be it further
Resolved, That the provision of Canon I.18.4* applies by extension to “Liturgical Resources I: I Will
Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing, Revised and Expanded 2015,  namely, “It shall be within the
discretion of any Member of the Clergy of this Church to decline to  preside at any rite contained
herein; and be it further
Resolved, That the provisions of Canon I.19.3 regarding marriage after divorce apply equally to all the
rites of “Liturgical Resources I: I Will Bless You and You Will Be a Blessing, Revised and Expanded
2015,  in accordance with guidelines established by each diocese; and be it further
Resolved, That this convention honor the theological diversity of this Church in regard to matters of
human sexuality; and that no bishop, priest, deacon or lay person should be coerced or penalized in
any manner, nor suffer any canonical disabilities, as a result of his or her theological objection to or
support for the 78th General Convention’s action contained in this resolution; and be it further
Resolved, That the Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music continue to monitor the use of this
material and report to the 79th General Convention; and be it further
Resolved, That the 78th General Convention direct the Secretary of General Convention, and the
Custodian of the Standard Book of Common Prayer in consultation with the outgoing Chair of the
Standing Commission on Liturgy and Music and the Chairs of the Legislative Committees to whom
STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

152 of 158

this legislation is referred, to finalize and arrange for the publication with Church Publishing of the
material (in English and Spanish) contained in “Liturgical Resources 1: I Will Bless You and You Will Be
a Blessing, Revised and Expanded 2015  as approved by the 78th General Convention, no later than
the first Sunday of Advent 2015, these materials to be available electronically at no cost.

*Canon I.18.4 refers to the 2012 Constitution and Canons; a comparable provision is contained in Canon I.18.7 of
the 2015 Constitution and Canons.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

153 of 158

4. Consultation on Same-Sex Marriage:
Executive Summary of Evaluations
The Consultation on Same-Sex Marriage invited participants from several dioceses in states where marriage
equality is legally recognized to share their experiences and contexts and also to provide responses to the
resources that the SCLM subcommittee had developed. Additionally, the Consultation also invited
participants from other Anglican Communion Provinces having marriage equality as well as representatives
from other mainline Protestant denominations, which added both international and ecumenical dimensions
to the discussion.
The intensive two-day consultation (held in Kansas City, Missouri on June 3–5, 2014, Tuesday evening
through Thursday evening) included both an indaba-style conversation, with the objective of structured
mutual listening to diverse contexts and concerns on the topic of marriage equality, and a focused workshop
to provide responses to the work of the SCLM subcommittee on the resources. Recorders for small groups
captured the key points of the resources discussion.
At the end of the Consultation, a short evaluative questionnaire was distributed to solicit feedback from
participants on their experience and personal responses to the meeting. Although the survey response rate
was over 50 percent (N=36) and provided some helpful feedback, other questions remained that needed
following up.
The objective of this follow-up evaluation report for the SCLM Consultation on Same-Sex Marriage is to
probe for further insights and reflections on the resources discussed in the Consultation, on the value of the
indaba-style conversation to the overall process, and on the inclusion of other Anglican Communion and
ecumenical participants in the Consultation, and to gather suggestions for next steps. The report is based on
a sample of seven in-depth participant interviews bringing together perspectives from within The Episcopal
Church (TEC), from other Anglican Communion Provinces, and from an ecumenical standpoint.
Respondents highly valued the Consultation experience, including both the content that was presented and
shared and the opportunity to hear and learn from other contexts. The Consultation also served to reinforce
the interconnections among those deeply involved with this topic yet deeply embedded within their own
congregational, diocesan, provincial, or denominational contexts.
The resources were broadly affirmed. For TEC participants, they were seen as fully answering why the
Episcopal Church is blessing same-sex relationships. The absence of a blessing substantively similar to that
used in the BCP Marriage Rite was the only concern raised over the liturgy. International and ecumenical
responses were complimentary, but they also noted some need for local adaptation. The resources
addressing biblical and theological issues were viewed as usable as-is across a range of differing contexts. A
request was made to translate the resources for use in another Province.
All respondents found the mixture of TEC, international, and ecumenical participants highly informative and
deeply moving. The Consultation’s inclusion of those voices also demonstrated the Episcopal Church’s
interest in engaging other Anglican Communion Provinces and seriously listening to their contexts. This step
also helped to dispel stereotypical assumptions held by some participants about other contexts, and it
helped some to realize that the Provinces could talk to each other in less formal ways about topics of mutual
interest.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

154 of 158

The indaba-style conversation at first appeared to suffer from a lack of diversity in viewpoints, but
participants also found value in being able to explore other facets, which allowed subtle but important
nuances to emerge. The indaba approach was particularly effective in helping participants move to a deeper
level of conversation and understanding. International participants also hoped to apply aspects of this
experience to future indabas in their own Provinces.
Suggested next steps focused on two themes: 1) rethinking marriage overall in the context and life of the
Church, and 2) immediate advocacy as a social justice issue. Other suggestions included supplementary
materials for deputations along with more publicly visible actions.
In conclusion, respondents felt hopeful about the work of the SCLM and for the Episcopal Church’s
leadership on this topic, which was described as “cutting edge.  Both interview responses and a review of
the questionnaire data suggest that the Consultation was an invaluable step for participants personally and
for working within the Church interactively for broad social change.

The Rev. Paula D. Nesbitt, Ph.D.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

155 of 158

5. Glossary of Legal and Canonical Terms
This glossary of legal and canonical terms, along with other terms often used in discussing same-sex
blessings, is intended to inform and enhance discussions of the theological and liturgical resources, as well as
preparation for and use of any liturgy authorized by General Convention. Most of these terms are discussed
in greater depth in the essay “Faith, Hope, and Love: Theological Resources for Blessing Same-Sex
Relationships. 
Blessing. “The active outgoing of divine grace. 1 When a blessing is given, for example, at a Celebration and
Blessing of a Marriage or during a rite for blessing a same-sex relationship, the Church understands that
God’s blessing has been recognized in the lives of the couple and also imparted in a new way because of the
Church’s action. The marital blessing involves three distinct but interdependent aspects: we (the Church)
bless God in thanksgiving for God’s grace already evident in the lives of the couple; we pronounce God’s
blessing upon those in covenantal relationships to strengthen their covenantal bonds; and we commission
couples as witnesses of God’s love for the world.
Blessing of a Civil Marriage. The Book of Common Prayer rite by which a husband and wife who were
previously married by competent civil authority, with appropriate documentation, have their civil marriage
blessed by the Church.
Canon. The Canons of the Episcopal Church are the laws which set out the enactments of the ecclesiastical
polity of the Church as governed by the Episcopal Church’s Constitution and revised by General Convention.
Each diocese of the Episcopal Church has its own canons, which must be consistent with the Canons of the
Episcopal Church.
Civil marriage. A civil marriage is a marriage obtained by following the legal requirements of the state or
jurisdiction in which the marriage is created. A civil marriage is often described as a special form of legal
contract, established and regulated by each state and entered into by two consenting parties. A civil
marriage carries both legal benefits and responsibilities under both state and federal law. A state’s civil
marriage statutes specify which couples are permitted to marry or are prohibited from marrying and who is
authorized to officiate at a civil marriage.
Civil union. A civil union was a state-recognized legal contract alternative authorized under the laws of some
states. The enacting statutes typically granted couples, including same-sex couples, in a civil union the rights,
benefits, and obligations of married couples under state law. These benefits and responsibilities varied from
state to state and in some cases did not replicate all of the benefits of civil marriage. The statutes specified
who was eligible to enter into a civil union and who was authorized to officiate at a civil union.
Under the federal law known as the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) and the laws of at least thirty-five
states, civil unions were either not recognized at all or were not recognized as the equivalent of civil
1

Alan Richardson, ed., A Theological Word Book of the Bible (New York: Macmillan, 1960), 33.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

156 of 158

marriage. DOMA withheld federal recognition of civil unions as marriages so couples in a civil union could not
have access to the same federal benefits. On June 26, 2013, the U. S. Supreme Court ruled that DOMA's
restriction of federal benefits to married couples consisting of one man and one woman was
unconstitutional, depriving married same-sex couples of equal protection and due process under the U. S.
Constitution.2
Common-law marriage. A common-law marriage is established when a man and a woman live together and
identify themselves as husband and wife for a sufficient time, with the express mutual intent of establishing
a marriage. Some states require seven years of continuous cohabitation, but others do not specify the
number of years. In states that recognize common-law marriage, the status of common-law marriage is
generally accorded all of the benefits and obligations of a civil marriage. Fewer than twenty states recognize
common-law marriages.
Constitution. Unless otherwise noted, this word refers to the Constitution of the Protestant Episcopal
Church in the United States of America, otherwise known as the Episcopal Church, as adopted by the
General Convention in October 1789 and amended in subsequent General Conventions.
Covenant. The fundamental relationship between God and God’s people. The concept has a long and varied
history, biblical and otherwise. Christians understand covenantal relationship to derive primarily from the
gracious covenant God has made with us in Christ. We enact this covenant in baptism and sustain it in the
eucharist. For the Church, a covenant is a relationship initiated by God through Jesus Christ to which a body
of people responds in faith; in which God promises that the people will be God’s; and in which God requires
God’s people to be faithful, to do justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God; and to whom,
through the Holy Spirit, God gives the grace to do so. As Christians, we respond to God’s gracious covenant
in Christ by living faithfully in all of our various relationships. Scripture and Christian history bear witness to
these essential elements of covenantal relationship: taking vows, intending lifelong commitment, and
bearing the fruit of God’s grace in the relationship.
Covenant of marriage. The Book of Common Prayer proclaims that “Christian marriage is a solemn and public
covenant between a man and a woman in the presence of God  (BCP, 422). In the Catechism (BCP, 861), in
response to the question “What is Holy Matrimony?  we read: “Holy Matrimony is Christian Marriage, in
which the woman and man enter into a life-long union, make their vows before God and the Church, and
receive the grace and blessing of God to help them fulfill their vows. 
Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA). See above, “civil union. 
Divorce. The legal process under state law by which a marriage is ended and through which the court
determines the parties’ future legal and financial obligations to each other and to their children. In states
with civil unions, the termination process generally is known as “dissolution,  or some term other than
“divorce. 
Domestic partnership. Some states and cities have enacted domestic partnership laws or ordinances,
granting same-sex and different-sex couples a bundle of specific rights, less than those granted under
marriage or civil-union laws. These laws vary considerably in their scope.

2

http://www.ncsl.org/research/human-services/same-sex-marriage-laws.aspx.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

157 of 158

Holy Matrimony. Holy Matrimony is Christian marriage, as defined above under “Covenant of Marriage, 
using The Celebration and Blessing of a Marriage or An Order for Marriage from the Book of Common Prayer.
Judgment of marital status. Under Canon I.19.2, a “member of the Church whose marriage has been annulled
or dissolved by a civil court may apply to the Bishop or Ecclesiastical Authority of the Diocese in which such
person is legally or canonically resident for a judgment as to his or her marital status in the eyes of the
Church. Such judgment may be a recognition of the nullity, or of the termination of the said marriage.  A
judgment of marital status may be requested at any time, not just when contemplating remarriage. Many
Church members find support and comfort, after the termination of a civil marriage, in seeking this
judgment, which establishes the unmarried status in the eyes of the Church. Such a judgment is also useful if
the person seeks to remarry and, under Canon I.19.3(a), must provide evidence of the end of the prior
marriage through annulment or divorce. This process is distinct from the consultation with the Bishop
Diocesan regarding remarriage after divorce, found in Canon I.19.3(c).
Same-sex marriage. On June 26, 2015, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the Fourteenth
Amendment requires a state to license a marriage between two people of the same sex and to recognize a
marriage between two people of the same sex when that marriage has been lawfully licensed and
performed outside of the state. These marriages are accorded all of the rights and obligations of civil
marriage under state law.
Vow. A solemn and voluntary promise. Marital vows are voluntary pledges instituted and accepted by the
Church, by which the woman and man give and bind themselves to each other. Vows exchanged in Holy
Matrimony or in the liturgy for blessing a same-sex couple represent commitment, fidelity, and witness.
As Christians have come to understand covenantal relationship, especially in the light of God’s gracious
covenant with us in Christ, a “vow  signifies permanence and inviolability. The Church affirms and supports
this definition of a vowed relationship for all couples entering into marriage as well as for same-sex couples
entering into covenantal relationship using the liturgy in this resource. The Church also recognizes that
human covenants will sometimes, perhaps often, fall short of the model established in the covenant God
makes with us in baptism. Nonetheless, Christians strive to enter into a vowed relationship with God’s help
and in the power of the Holy Spirit.

STANDING LITURGICAL COMMISSION ON LITURGY AND MUSIC

158 of 158

 id="file23242827" filename="major-and-minor-religion-and-theology" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://huronatwestern.ca/programs/theology/major-and-minor-religion-and-theology/">
 Major and Minor in Religion and Theology 
 Major/Minor in Religion and Theology 
 Gain critical knowledge and skills for understanding the way religious and theological issues have evolved and continue to influence contemporary life and culture, in a context that encourages discussion, reflection, and research. Even if you’re not religious, studying religion can help you understand the complex world we live in. 
 Religious beliefs and practices can have a huge impact on how individuals and groups make social, economic, and political decisions, and it’s important for Leaders with Heart to understand these complex issues to make well-informed, compassionate and effective decision. 
 Alumni Stories 
 The study of religion and theology enables students to dig deeper and find out about the literature, history and current practices of religions around the world. By developing their understanding of such a significant and complex area of influence for humanity, alumni who pursue this area of study are well positioned to work all over the world in positions of leadership. 
 Learn how Huron has helped empower religion and theology students to more effectively navigate conversations, situations and social change. If you see yourself in the stories of these Leaders with Heart, consider exploring this area of study more thoroughly to determine if it’s the right fit for you. 
 The Faculty is a citadel of excellence and Huron’s longstanding traditions set it apart. I would recommend Huron because of the quality of education it offers, the level of spiritual development it fosters, the excellent professors, and the school’s library − whose staff and resources help ensure students’ success. 
 You develop within classes that foster critical thinking; challenge you to ask complex questions; and learn how to understand the world in a more human way. 
 I found my spark and pursued it at Huron, and the experience was phenomenal. 
 Michael Bodkin 
 Master of Arts (Theology) Graduate, PhD Candidate at the Centre for the Study of Theory and Criticism at Western University 
 Major and Minor in Religion and Theology Program Modules 
 Major in Religion and Theology 
 Admission Requirements Completion of first-year requirements. 1.0 course from 1000-level Religious Studies courses (RS1010f and RS1015g) is recommended. 
 Module 6.0 courses: 1.0 course Religious Studies 2130 (Living Religions) 1.0 course from: RS1029 (New Testament Greek), RS 2124F/G (Introduction to the New Testament), Hebrew 1040A/B (Biblical Hebrew), RS 2420F/G (Introduction to the Hebrew Bible), Arabic 3260A/B (Qur’anic Arabic), RS 2310F/G (Introduction to the Qur’an) 1.0 additional course in Theological Studies and/or Religious Studies at the 2000 level or above. 3.0 additional courses in Theological Studies and/or Religious Studies at the 3000 level or above. 
 Minor in Religion and Theology 
 Admission Requirements Completion of first-year requirements. 1.0 course from 1000-level Religious Studies courses (RS 1010f and RS 1015g) is recommended. 
 Module 4.0 courses 1.0 course from Theological Studies and/or Religious Studies 2130. 1.0 course from: RS1029 (New Testament Greek), RS 2124F/G (Introduction to the New Testament), Hebrew 1040A/B (Biblical Hebrew), RS 2420F/G (Introduction to the Hebrew Bible), Arabic 3260A/B (Qur’anic Arabic), RS 2310F/G (Introduction to the Qur’an) 2.0 courses in Theology Theological Studies and Religious Studies at the 2000 level or above (Course numbers ending in a/b/f/g are 0.5 courses.) 
 SPECIALIZATION 
 MAJOR 
 MINOR 
 Huron has launched a brand new program to better serve the needs an interests of our diverse student population. For those of you who aren’t familiar with the difference between religion and theology, here’s a simple comparison: 
 Religious Studies tends to look at different religions from around the world, comparing and contrasting them to deal with questions like, “What is religion?  and how do practices, views and literature compare between different belief systems? 
 Theology takes more of a deep dive into particular religions, so you can develop a specific and fulsome understanding of what that religion is composed of and how it affects followers 
 Engage with this program to explore both of these exciting avenues of religious and theological contemplation. You’ll learn to successfully and compassionately navigate complex cultural and social situations, as well as gain a deeper appreciation for the trials and tribulations faced by minority groups who refused to concede to corruption in order to protect their beliefs. 
 Religion and Theology Courses 
 Gain critical knowledge and skills for understanding the way religious and theological issues have evolved and continue to influence contemporary life and culture, in a context that encourages discussion, reflection, and research. 
 2021-22 Rel Studies, Arabic, Hebrew, Greek, Theo Studies Courses 
 *For classrooms, see your student.uwo.ca account, www.registrar.uwo.ca “f  and “a  courses are in fall; “g  & “b  are in winter. No suffix = full-year course Please email srice@uwo.ca if you have questions about taking these courses. 
 INTERESTED IN LEARNING MORE, OR APPLYING TO ONE OF HURON’S PROGRAMS IN THEOLOGY? 
 First Name 
 Last Name 
 Email 
 Phone 
 Current Level of Education Current Level of Education high schoolcurrently in universityundergraduate degreegraduate degree 
 Which program(s) are you interested in? (Select all that apply) Which program(s) are you interested in? (Select all that apply) BA Religion & TheologyMTSMDivMA Theology 
 Religion and Theology Studies Professors 
 Our professors are delighted about this new program offering: they can’t wait to support a broader range of students to discover the value of theological and religious investigation. No matter where you come from or what you believe, our professors are confident they will help you develop transferrable skills that will help you Lead with Heart in your local and global communities. Prepare to be challenged by educators who are passionate about critical analysis, character development and fostering enlightening conversations. Bring your boldest ideas to your classes and prepare to develop new perspectives that better reflect our ever-changing world. 
 I allow myself to feel the anger, sadness, despair over the things that humans are capable of doing in order to understand the phenomenon - in order to limit, to minimize, the things that cause the despair. 
 My goal in teaching is to help people understand the New Testament and the origins of Christianity in ways that are both historically sensitive (avoiding the problem of anachronism) and culturally engaged (avoiding the pitfall of ethnocentrism). 
 My teaching aim is to introduce, broaden, and enrich students' knowledge of Christian liturgical studies. Liturgy encompasses many different disciplines in addition to engaging students in both academic research and pastoral application. 
 Interested in other opportunities in Theology at Huron? 
 Major and Minor in Religion and Theology Careers 
 Our Theology graduates are ready to inspire citizens around the world. Whether they want to support people to find their faith or they want to become a potent Leader with Heart in a corporate or community position, our alumni have the heightened perspective, relationship-building skills and leadership qualities to make positive differences in any work environment. 
 Learn about where the study of theology and religion can take you. Trust that Huron’s unique learning environments and legacy of teaching excellence will create the ideal educational setting for your journey toward enhanced understanding of the power, influence and issues particular to this exciting area of study. 
 Sandra Rice 
 Send Your Message 
 Caleb Hayhoe, Founder & Chairman, Flowerdale Group Ltd. 
 Caleb Hayhoe is the Founder & Chairman of Flowerdale Group and a Huron Class of ’85 Alumnus. Flowerdale Group is a Hong Kong based family office with a global investment outlook across public markets, real estate and private investment. Hayhoe previously spent over ten years building a global sourcing business together with an exceptional team, and remains committed to entrepreneurialism and helping great ideas become sustainable companies. 
 Hayhoe prioritizes character above all else when looking at who and what to invest in. “I have hired hundreds of people, and what I always look for is how people do things,  Hayhoe says. “As the world becomes increasingly globalized, businesses have access to countless intelligent, qualified people. However, cultural capital is what really counts: you need to be willing to learn, work well with people from diverse backgrounds and accept ideas that starkly differ from your own.  
 Hayhoe, who currently lives in London, UK, remains an avid believer in the value of a Liberal Arts education. As a member of Huron’s Board of Governors, he hopes to reaffirm and support the responsibility of educational institutions to develop graduates who have integrity and who recognize the importance of balancing financial success with social responsibility. 
 He looks forward to working with Huron’s Board of Governors to create a legacy at Huron that stands for the core fundamental values of treating people with dignity and respect and acting in the best interests of society. 
 “I am excited about the opportunity to help my alma mater become an even more representative and dynamic school that emphasizes integrity, celebrates uniqueness and never loses that sense of home it had when I attended,  he says. 
 × 
 Moustafa Ezz 
 Director, International Recruitment 
 Hey, I’m your personal admissions advisor for huron 
 Hey, I’m your personal admissions advisor for huron 
 The Huron Experience is truly one-of-a-kind. While most universities take in thousands of students every year, Huron selectively limits our annual incoming cohort to around 500 students each year. Even though we keep our community strategically small, we ensure they are truly representative of our global community, and we welcome exceptional young leaders from dozens of countries all over the world to our campus each year. This means, the average number of students in your classes will be 33 rather than 300, 500 or 800 like most other undergraduate programs. Plus, our student to faculty ratio is only 11:1. For us, the quality of your experience will always be more important than merely increasingly the quantity of our students. 
 Most undergraduate learning environments in Canada involve sitting in a lecture hall with hundreds of students, watching slideshows and memorizing textbooks. Huron classes are different. Here, professors will mentor you, not lecture you. You will engage with the course materials through interaction and debate with your peers and learn in the real-world through capstone projects, high-level research unique on the undergraduate level, as well as through real-life learning experiences throughout Canada and around the world. 
 Why do we do this? Because it’s all about you. At Huron, you can expect a premium undergraduate experience. Our staff and faculty will know your name, not just your student number. We will know your story and are personally invested in making sure you achieve your goals and maximize your potential. 
 × 
 Powerful Career & Alumni Connections 
 Huron’s alumni network includes world-renowned leaders, in every industry, who you can learn from, network with and emulate. Huron alumni live in 59 countries worldwide and Lead with Heart in business, government, technology, law, international affairs and more. 
 With a graduating class of 400 students rather than 4,000, it’s possible to connect each and every student with an alumni mentor who will be personally invested in your success and can directly connect you to career opportunities where they work. This can make the difference between starting out in an entry level position and attaining a distinguished career. 
 Plus, you’ll never have to search for mentorship or a job alone. You will have one-on-one guidance from your Career Development Team who works hard solely to provide our talented students with alumni mentors working in the field or organization of your dreams. 
 How do Huron’s distinct advantages develop exceptional alumni? Our campus, which has the resources to nurture individual gifts, creates an environment where you’re strongly encouraged to show up and speak out. Within our interactive classrooms, there’s no sitting back and passively taking in information. Instead, you learn presentation, debate and the kind of human and leadership skills that will be most in demand in a world of ever-increasing automation and artificial intelligence. 
 × 
 World-Class Partnerships 
 Huron – Harvard Collaboration 
 Our university promises to deliver on an education that is as prestigious as it is principled, and part of that commitment involves our collaboration with the world’s highest calibre of institutions. When you choose Huron, you gain access to partnership opportunities at the world-renowned Harvard University. 
 Huron is the only Ontario university to supplement the development of your head and heart with a Harvard certificate 
 Harvard Business School Online (Harvard) provides students, in any Huron program, with a chance to gain the fundamentals of business thinking. The online Credential of Readiness (CORe) program will enable Huron students to contribute to business discussions and decision-making, whether you’re looking to advance your career, considering graduate school, or narrowing down the career path best suited to your potential. 
 This Ivy League badge of honour is the perfect supplement to a well-rounded Liberal Arts degree and will ensure future employers recognize your dedication to business best practices, as well as accountable leadership. 
 Huron – Ivey Dual Degree Programs 
 The Ivey Business School is Canada’s first and most prestigious business school. Complete your first two years at Huron and apply to Ivey’s Honours Business Administration (HBA) program. Students can also apply for Advanced Entry Opportunity (AEO) conditional, pre-admission status to the HBA program from secondary school 
 Because of our small classes, one-on-one faculty mentorship and opportunities to build leadership skills through internships, volunteering, community-based learning and travel study, Huron students can keep their grades high and build impressive extracurricular portfolios — all of which are vital to acceptance at 
 × 
 Guaranteed Paid Internships 
 Paid Internships: At Huron, every single student is guaranteed a paid internship, so you will get to connect your learning with workplace experience and earn while you learn. 
 Entry-level work positions no longer require entry-level experience. To secure a job right after graduation, you need to show employers you’re capable of contributing significant value to your workplace. 
 At Huron’s Career Development Centre, you will work one-on-one with your advisor to find the right fit for your paid internship. Your personal Career Development team member will help connect you with a position that sparks your curiosity and nurtures your interests, while providing you with experiences to add to your resume. Huron has an extensive group of esteemed alumni who are leading industries, around the world, and are eager to give back by providing our students with internship and career opportunities. This, along with our strategically selective campus, means you’re not competing with hundreds of students for internship positions, so Huron students always have a better chance to secure a meaningful experience. 
 WealthSimple (Toronto, ON) | United Nations (Geneva, Switzerland) | London Economic Development Corporation (London, ON) | Agha Khan University Hospital Foundation (Nairobi, Kenya) | 3M Canada (London, ON) | Deloitte (Toronto, ON) | Ernst & Young (London, ON) | KPMG (Toronto, ON) | HSBC Bank (London, UK) | Clearbit (San Francisco, USA) | Government of Canada (Ottawa) | Bank of Montreal (Toronto, ON) 
 × 
 Our Culture of Care 
 Our Leaders with Heart learn better and do more because we ensure our resources are never spread thin across our student body. Our strategically sized university means not only will you establish meaningful relationships with your professors, but our administration and staff are also readily available to enrich your time here. We never overcrowd our programs because we believe in providing a transformative education, not churning out degrees. 
 From the moment you begin your application and throughout all four years, we will work with you to ensure you’re thriving. At Huron we don’t have long lines and wait times, individualized one-on-one support from our staff and advisors is available on-demand. With one professor per 11 students and the same number of wellness, professional development and international support staff members as many large universities, you can feel confident you will always have people, who genuinely care about you, in your corner. 
 Who are some of the people who contribute to Huron’s Culture of Care? 
 Our Admissions team, who will work side-by-side with you and your family as you begin to apply, to provide personalized program recommendations and assistance with every step of the application & scholarship process 
 Our President who gives out his personal cell phone number, is consistently a presence at student events and responds to your emails within 48 hours, 7 days a week. 
 World-renowned faculty who are celebrated academics, researchers and educators and are always available to meet with you individually outside of class time 
 Student Advisors who will always be available 1-on-1 to help you with any of your academic, wellness and professional development needs 
 At Huron you will never have to go through any red tape. You will always have direct access to the support you need – unlike at large institutions where you may need to wait weeks to address your needs. 

 id="file23242681" filename="many-americans-think-theyre-blessed" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://newrepublic.com/article/132314/many-americans-think-theyre-blessed">
 You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser and improve your visit to our site. 
 Bowler recently wrote a book—Blessed: A History of the American Prosperity Gospel—that has been hailed as the first monograph tracing the history of the prosperity gospel in America. The prosperity gospel, Bowler explains, is “the belief that God grants health and wealth to those with the right kind of faith.  
 Bowler recalls how the prosperity gospel transformed the Mennonite farming community in Manitoba where she grew up. When the community’s pastor showed off the motorcycle he received for “pastor’s appreciation day,  it signaled a new religious attitude about material wealth. She describes explaining this change as her “intellectual obsession.  
 The experience of fighting cancer, however, gave her fresh insight to this obsession: Can the prosperity gospel make sense of radical and senseless tragedy? Or does its theology rob us of the opportunity to come to terms with our suffering? 
 Today, America seems divided between those who engage with some version of the prosperity gospel and those who smugly dismiss it as fraudulent and puerile. While there are a number of problems with the gospel, it’s important to look at why this strand of religious thinking evolved in the first place, and why it persists. 
 A right to wealth and health 
 The prosperity gospel is based on a simple premise: God wants us to live “in abundance.  But in order to receive the gifts we are promised, we must demonstrate faith and claim the prosperity that is rightfully ours. 
 Even if many Americans have never heard the term, most are familiar with images of oft-satirized televangelists shaking down their viewers for donations in return for blessings. 
 The prosperity gospel has also been used to explain good health and even good luck. 
 After a string of lethal tornadoes moved though Texas in December 2015, a survivor named Sabrina Lowe claimed that God had given her authority over the winds—and that her family had “commanded  the tornado to move elsewhere. 
 Lowe’s narrative strangely inverted feelings of survivor’s guilt that often follow natural disasters. Instead, she claimed agency and credit for her good fortune. Like the televangelist’s promise of financial blessings in exchange for “seed  donations, the idea of commanding immunity from natural disasters is also a manifestation of prosperity gospel theology. 
 Bowler’s work has shown that the prosperity gospel is much more embedded within American culture than these spectacular examples might suggest. 
 The origins of the prosperity gospel date back to a nineteenth-century movement called New Thought, which asserted that health and fortune can be achieved through positive thinking. New Thought never went out of fashion: It survives today in books like The Secret, which promises financial success and physical health to those who think positively. The book has sold more than 19 million copies. 
 Bowler credits the early twentieth-century pastor E.W. Kenyon with creating a new theology that blended New Thought with the idea that the Bible promises Christians a “legal right  to prosperity. After World War II, the prosperity gospel was spread by popular evangelists like Oral Roberts and became associated with Pentecostalism and televangelism. 
 While relatively few congregations define themselves as preachers of the “prosperity gospel,  elements of the theology saturate American culture. 
 Controversial televangelist Joel Olsteen claims that he “shuns  the prosperity gospel label, but still asserts that those who are “blessed  can expect financial rewards along with healthy families and peace of mind. Talk show hostess Oprah Winfrey has been accused of promoting prosperity gospel thinking by pushing inspirational messages to her audience that emphasize the benefits of a positive attitude. Instagram photos and tweets marked with the hashtag “#blessed  populate social media feeds. 
 Meanwhile, politicians will often claim that America’s prosperity is a direct result of God’s blessing. 
 Beyond the United States, the prosperity gospel is now spreading rapidly to countries like Brazil and Nigeria. In fact, Nigeria is now home to some of the wealthiest pastors on the planet—which, from the perspective of the prosperity gospel, is an accomplishment to be proud of. 
 Holy hypocrites? 
 Criticizing the prosperity gospel is arguably as American as the prosperity gospel itself. 
 Theologians have denounced its denial of the reality of suffering. Religious scholar Reza Aslan has called prosperity gospel preachers “charlatans,  and the Lausanne Movement, a group cofounded by Billy Graham, has accused them of “gravely distorting the Bible.  
 In a 2015 editorial for Time, Kareem Abdul Jabar called the prosperity gospel “war on the poor,  arguing that it works like to lottery, exploiting the hopes of the poor and desperate. Journalist Sarah Posner writes that the movement equates capitalist ideology with Christianity in order recruit the poor as foot soldiers for a conservative culture war. 
 While liberals associate the prosperity gospel with conservative Christianity, it also has critics on the right. In 2010, Iowa Republican Senator Chuck Grassley launched an investigation into six televangelists who have been known to preach the prosperity gospel. After more than three years, Grassley’s investigation failed to discover any evidence of wrongdoing or impose any penalties. 
 Other investigations have exposed the gospel’s capacity for duplicity. 
 In 1991, ABC’s “PrimeTime Live  featured a devastating expose of Robert Tilton, a televangelist who mailed handprint tracings, packets of “holy oil  and other mementos to his donors. He encouraged recipients to write their needs on these objects and mail them back with donations so that Tilton’s ministry could ensure their prayers are answered. “PrimeTime Live  discovered the donations went directly to a bank for deposit. In the dumpster behind the bank their team found sacks of unread mail from believers desperate for help. 
 Painful certainty 
 But rather than further eviscerate the prosperity gospel, Bowler’s study attempts to render this movement understandable. 
 Drawing from her ethnographic research in prosperity gospel churches, she shows how this movement is not simply about “praying yourself rich,  but is instead a “comprehensive approach to the human condition.  
 Far from lazily hoping that God would somehow fix all their problems, Bowler found that the prosperity gospel requires practitioners to cultivate an intense mental discipline in order to constantly suppress thoughts of negativity or doubt. 
 The idea of the prosperity gospel as a system for controlling one’s thoughts may explain its popularity in a country where 18 percent of adults suffer from anxiety disorders. Americans spend an estimated US$42 billion a year treating these disorders. 
 Bowler’s findings suggest that one reason for the prosperity gospel’s popularity is that it serves a function similar to therapy or medication. With some discipline, it may, in fact, be possible to feel “too blessed to be stressed.  
 Even though historians of religion are trained to avoid making normative claims about how religions should be practiced, several reviews of Blessed were critical of Bowler’s sympathetic portrayal of the prosperity gospel. They felt she had downplayed the outrages of figures like Tilton. Some even called her an apologist. 
 But in her editorial, Bowler is able to speak with a more personal voice. She offers some wise critiques of the prosperity gospel and the broader project of finding meaning in human suffering. 
 Emphasizing her perspective as a Christian, as well as a historian, she writes: 
 The prosperity gospel has taken a religion based on the contemplation of a dying man and stripped it of its call to surrender all. Perhaps worse, it has replaced Christian faith with the most painful forms of certainty. The movement has perfected a rarefied form of America’s addiction to self-rule, which denies much of our humanity: our fragile bodies, our finitude, our need to stare down our deaths (at least once in a while) and be filled with dread and wonder. At some point, we must say to ourselves, I’m going to need to let go. 
 In other words, while the prosperity gospel clearly “works  for its believers, its benefits come with a price. The promise that we can have whatever we want leaves us ill-equipped to confront the realities of death and suffering. 
 Tragedy becomes much harder to deal with when we are conditioned to think of ourselves as “blessed.  

 id="file23242784" filename="mary" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://religionfacts.com/mary">
 The Virgin Mary 
 ADVERTISEMENT 
 Definition: The Virgin Mary 
 The mother of Jesus Christ and one of the most important figures of the Christian religion, especially in Catholicism. 
 Mary, the mother of Jesus Christ, is one of the most important figures of the Christian religion. Mary is known by many titles in Christianity, including the Blessed Virgin Mary (sometimes abbreviated BVM), Queen of Heaven, Theotokos (Mother of God) and Our Lady (Notre-Dame in French; Madonna in Italian). According to the New Testament, Mary was a virgin when she became pregnant with Jesus (e.g. Matthew 1:18) 
 Because of Mary's humility, piety and role as the mother of Jesus Christ, the Savior of humanity, she has been accorded great respect in all branches of Christianity and is a favorite subject in art, music and literature. In Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches, Mary is the pre-eminent saint and the focus of much popular devotion. In recent years, Protestant Christianity has sought to recover the importance of Mary, even though it doesn't elevate her as highly as do other branches of the Christian faith. 
 Mary in the New Testament 
 The Virgin Mary plays a prominent role in the New Testament gospels (i.e. Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John), especially in the birth stories of Matthew (Ch. 1-2) and Luke (Ch. 1-2). According to Luke, Mary was of the tribe of Judah and the lineage of David (1:32). 
 When Mary was a young woman engaged to Joseph, the Angel Gabriel announced to her that she would give birth to a son that would be born of the Holy Spirit. Mary humbly accepted her divinely-appointed role, saying, "May it be unto me as you have said." She then conceived and gave birth to Jesus while remaining a virgin (Lk 1:31f; Mt 1:20, 23). 
 Mary appears periodically throughout Jesus' ministry, death and resurrection. She was present at Jesus' first miracle, which he performed reluctantly at her suggestion (John 2:1f). 
 At the crucifixion, Mary and a small group of women were present (Jn 19:25). Speaking from the cross, Jesus entrusted her care to his disciple John (Jn 19:26). One of Michaelangelo's most famous sculptures (right) depicts Mary mourning her son's death. 
 According to traditional interpretation, the Virgin Mary was not the "other Mary" who visited the tomb after Jesus' death (Matthew 28:1) – it is said she did not visit the tomb because she already knew he would not be there. 
 In addition, there is no biblical record of the resurrected Jesus appearing to Mary. In 1997, the Pope speculates that it is highly likely Jesus did appear to his mother (Vatican Information Services, May 21, 1997). After the resurrection, Mary was present in the Upper Room at Jerusalem with the disciples (Acts 1:14), but this is the last biblical mention of her. 
 Mary in Apocryphal Texts 
 The Gospel of James contains biographical material about Mary considered plausible by some Orthodox and Catholic Christians. It states she was the daughter of Joachim and Anna, who were quite old when she was conceived. They took her to live in the Temple in Jerusalem when she was three years old, as Hannah took Samuel to the Tabernacle in the Old Testament. The Gospel of James also teaches Mary's perpetual virginity. 
 Mary in Early Christian Theology 
 In the writings of the early church fathers, Mary is mentioned only occasionally and primarily in contrast to Eve. Justin Martyr (d. c.165) and Irenaeus (d. c.202) contrasted Mary's obedience with Eve's disobedience. The apocryphal Gospel of James (as seen above), Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, and especially Athanasius affirmed Mary's perpetual virginity. This doctrine was accepted by both Western and Eastern Churches from the fifth century onwards. 
 The doctrine of Mary as Theotokos (God-bearer) arose in Alexandria and was probably first used by Origen. It became common in the fourth century, was opposed by Nestorius, and accepted at the Council of Ephesus in 431. Mary played a lesser role in the West than in the East at this time. Western theologians like St. Ambrose primarily spoke of Mary as a "type" or symbol of the Church. 
 The doctrine of the bodily Assumption of Mary was formally developed by St. Gregory of Tours (d. 594), although it had been present in apocryphal tests since the late fourth century. The Feast of the Assumption became widespread in the sixth century, and sermons on that occasion tended to emphasize Mary's power in heaven. 
 Mary in the Reformation and Protestantism 
 Despite the Reformers' rejection of the veneration of Mary and other saints, most Protestants have shown a great deal of honor and respect for Mary. Martin Luther said Mary is "the highest woman," that "we can never honour her enough," that "the veneration of Mary is inscribed in the very depths of the human heart" and that we should "wish that everyone know and respect her." 
 John Calvin said, "It cannot be denied that God in choosing and destining Mary to be the Mother of his Son, granted her the highest honor." Ulrich Zwingli said, "I esteem immensely the Mother of God," and, "The more the honor and love of Christ increases among men, so much the esteem and honor given to Mary should grow." 
 Some Reformers rejected the Immaculate Conception, and the Assumption of Mary, but some affirmed the perpetual virginity of Mary and all accepted the Virgin Birth. 
 Since the Reformation, Protestants have tended to pay little attention to Mary, primarily in reaction against the excessive level of adoration they believe is relegated to her in Catholic and Orthodox Christianity. But this may be beginning to change. In the summer of 2004, Christian History & Biography magazine (affiliated with the Protestant Christianity Today) dedicated an entire issue to Mary. Included were articles suggesting the value of making a larger place for her in Protestantism. [6] In December 2004, the Southern Baptist dean of an evangelical school in Alabama said: 
 I would like Protestants today, evangelicals today, to go back to the reformers. I don't think we have to become Roman Catholics or Eastern Orthodox believers to recover a truly Protestant, reformational, scriptural understanding of Mary. [7] 
 Professor Beverley Roberts Gaventa of Princeton Theological Seminary, whose writings have called for more Protestant emphasis of Mary agrees, pointing out: 
 What happens in the story is that Mary is chosen entirely by God's own initiative. This is a primary example of what Protestants emphasize as God's divine grace, God's initiative. [7] 
 The Immaculate Conception 
 The Most Blessed Virgin Mary was, from the first moment of her conception, by a singular grace and privilege of almighty God and by virtue of the merits of Jesus Christ, Savior of the human race, preserved immune from all stain of original sin. 
 -- Pope Pius IX, Ineffabilis Deus (1854) 
 According to the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception, Mary was born without the stain of original sin. Both Catholics and Orthodox accept this doctrine, but only the Roman Catholic Church has solemnly defined the teaching, and the title "Immaculate Conception" is generally used only by Catholics. Most Protestants reject the idea as having no foundation in Scripture. 
 In Eastern Orthodox Churches, the matter is seen somewhat differently. Orthodox Christians reject the western doctrine of original sin, preferring instead to speak of a tendency towards sin. Thus they believe Mary was born without sin, but so is everyone else. However, Orthodox still affirm Mary was "immaculate" (i.e., sinless) in that the grace of God preserved her from any actual sin during her lifetime. 
 Unlike the Virgin Birth and the Assumption of Mary, the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception has not gone uncontested within the Catholic Church. It was the source of great controversy among medieval theologians, primarily because it was believed original sin was passed on to one's offspring through the sexual act and no one denied Mary was born in the natural way. Those opposing the doctrine included St. Anselm of Canterbury and the Dominicans; it was defended and explained by Anselm's student Eadmer, Duns Scotus, the Franciscans and the Jesuits. The Assumption of Mary was formally affirmed and defined for Roman Catholics in 1854. [1] 
 Mary as Virgin Mother 
 The notion that Mary gave birth to Jesus while remaining a virgin is taught explicitly in the birth narratives of Matthew (1:18 ff.) and Luke (1:34 ff.), but these seem to be the only references to the Virgin Birth in the New Testament. The Gospel of Mark begins with Jesus as an adult, and the Gospel of John, while beginning with Jesus' pre-birth existence, does not mention any miraculous aspects of Jesus' birth. Galatians 4:4, the earliest allusion to Mary in Christian literature, states only that Jesus was "born of woman." Most scholars do not attach special significance to this phrase on the basis that "as parallels such as Job 14:1 and Matthew 11:11 suggest, the phrase is a Hebraic way of speaking about the essential humanity of a person."[3] 
 After the New Testament, the doctrine of the Virgin Birth became prominent. It appeared frequently in early Christian literature, it was formalized in the ecumenical creeds, and it was accepted by the Reformers, who rejected most other Catholic doctrines regarding Mary. Today, the Virgin Birth continues to be accepted by Catholics, Orthodox, and Protestants alike. 
 Mary as Theotokos or the Mother of God 
 The doctrine of Mary to attract the most controversy within Christianity is her title of Theotokos (Greek for "God-bearer" or "Mother of God"). This term first arose in Alexandria, Egypt, around the fourth century and quickly gained popularity. Despite centering on a title for Mary, the issue actually has much more to do with Christology. The notion of Mary as God-bearer was intended to reflect the then-established belief that Jesus was fully divine. However, for some (most notably Nestorius), it did so at the expense of Jesus' full humanity. In 431, the Council of Ephesus affirmed the use of Theotokos as acceptable and condemned Nestorius. Today, Theotokos is used often by Orthodox Christians as a synonym for Mary, and Catholics regularly refer to Mary as Mother of God. 
 Mary as Perpetual Virgin 
 Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy teach that Mary was not only a virgin before she gave birth to Jesus, but she remained a virgin her entire life. Some Protestants also hold this view, including Luther, Zwingli, and Calvin, but most modern Protestants believe she later had other children with Joseph since the Bible speaks of Jesus' brothers and sisters. Catholics and Orthodox explain references to Jesus' brothers as either cousins, or as step brothers who were Joseph's children by a prior marriage. {2} 
 The Assumption of Mary 
 According to Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox tradition, between three and fifteen years after Christ's Ascension, in either Jerusalem or Ephesus, Mary died while surrounded by the apostles. Later when the apostles opened her tomb, they found it empty and concluded that she had been bodily assumed into Heaven. {2} 
 This doctrine was present in apocryphal works since the end of the fourth century, and was formally taught by St. Gregory of Tours in the sixth century. The bodily Assumption of Mary seems to have been accepted in both Western and Eastern Churches from the sixth century onwards, and went virtually uncontested until the Reformation. {1} 
 In 1950, speaking ex cathedra (infallibly) in his encyclical Munificentissimus Deus, Pope Pius XII proclaimed the Dogma of the Assumption, in which he stated that "at the end of her earthly course, Mary was assumed into heavenly glory, body and soul." {4} 
 Mary as Coredemptrix and Mediatrix of All Graces 
 An additional doctrine of Mary believed by many Catholics, but not yet formalized by the Pope, is that of Mary as Coredemptrix. This title indicates that Mary participated in some way in Christ's redemption of mankind. At its simplest, this doctrine is based on Mary's free acceptance of her opportunity to give birth to the Savior, as indicated by her reply, "May it be unto me as you have said" (Lk 1:38). This event is sometimes referred to as the "guarantee of the Incarnation." 
 Over the years, however, the term Coredemptrix has come to denote a more active role for Mary than her assent. The Second Vatican Council declared, "in suffering with Him as He died on the cross, she cooperated in the work of the Savior, in an altogether singular way, by obedience, faith, hope, and burning love, to restore supernatural life to souls" (Lumen gentium 61-62). However, Catholic theologians differ as to the precise nature of Mary's participation in the redemption, and, as aforementioned, the Pope has yet to speak ex cathedra on the subject. 
 Closely related to this doctrine is that of Mary as Mediatrix of All Graces, which affirms that all graces Christ obtains for humanity are dispensed by and through Mary. The Second Vatican Council also touched on this subject when it stated that "the Blessed Virgin's salutary influence on men... flows from the superabundance of the merits of Christ, rests on His mediation, depends entirely on it, and draws all its power from it" (Lumen gentium 60). This also has not been formally affirmed by the pope, but it is popular among many Catholics. 
 A lay Catholic organization, the Vox Populi Mariae Mediatrici (Voice of the People for Mary Mediatrix), has been founded with the goal of winning formal recognition of the "fifth doctrine of Mary," which includes Mary as Coredemptrix, Mediatrix of All Graces, and Advocate for the People of God. The organization is currently collecting signatures that will be included with a letter to the Pope asking that he "define and proclaim the Blessed Virgin Mary as Coredemptrix, Mediatrix of all grace and Advocate for the People of God." {5} 
 Mary in Other Faiths 
 Islamic theology accepts that Jesus was the result of a virgin birth. The Quran tells the story of Maryam (Mary) in two places, 3:35-47 and 19:16-34, but provides much less detail than the New Testament. It says Maryam was dedicated to God's service by her mother while still in the womb (Quran 3:35), that she was cared for by Zakariya (Zecharias) (3:36), and that in her childhood God provided for her to help her grow strong and pious (3:37). God then sent an angel to announce that she could shortly expect to bear a son, specifying that "O Mary! Allah hath chosen thee and purified thee - chosen thee above the women of all nations." (Qur'an 3:42). It specifies that she conceived Jesus despite being a virgin: "She said: "O my Lord! How shall I have a son when no man hath touched me?" He said: "Even so: Allah createth what He willeth: When He hath decreed a plan, He but saith to it, 'Be,' and it is!" (3:47). {2} 
 Many followers of Wicca associate Mary with the Earth Mother of various Neo-pagan traditions. Some Buddhists have linked Mary to Kuan-Yin, a Bodhisattva of compassion venerated by various Chinese Buddhist faiths. {2} Followers of the New Age movement or those interested in general spirituality have also found inspiration in Mary. 
 References 
 F.L. Cross and E.A. Livingstone, eds., "Mary, the Blessed Virgin." Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (Oxford UP, 1997), pp. 1047-48. 
 "Mary, Mother of Jesus." Wikipedia. January 4, 2005. 
 "Mary." Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Premium Service. January 4, 2005. 
 Munificentissimus Deus - Apostolic Constitution of Pope Pius XII issued November 1, 1950. 
 Petition for the Papal definition of Mary, Coredemptrix, Mediatrix and Advocate. 
 Mary in the Imagination of the Church – Christian History and Biography Magazine, Summer Issue 2004. 
 Protestant Mary - PBS Religion & Ethics Newsweekly, December 17, 2004 
 External Links on Mary 
 Blessed Virgin Mary – Catholic Pages. Various articles on Catholic doctrines and practices related to Mary. 
 Catholic Perspectives 
 Scott Hahn, Hail, Holy Queen (2001). "Melds autobiographical reflections, scriptural interpretation, and historical anecdotes in an accessible style to clarify some sophisticated points of Catholic theology." 

 id="file23242579" filename="may-god-bless-you-text-messages-quotes-status" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.imnepal.com/may-god-bless-you-text-messages-quotes-status/">
 155 May God Bless You Always Text Messages, Quotes & Status Collection 
 Advertisement 
 155 May God Bless You Always Text Messages, Quotes & Status 
 Wishing others helps us to maintain a good bond with them and it can enhance our relations so you can use the following text to show your love and affection towards your loveable persons. Here we have may God bless you always text messages, wishes, quotes and status collection for you. 
 May God always be with you and may His blessings always and forever surround you. I pray that whatever you do, you shall achieve in your life because you have earned it with your hard work and your diligence. Always be a hard worker and always look onto the positive and brighter things in life. And of course, may God always bless you, my dear. 
 Do not think too hard about anything. Just do your best, work very hard and let the rest be taken care of by God. God will surely help those who help themselves. May God bless you with all of the blessings that you shall need my dear. Have faith in God and all shall definitely turn out to be just fine. 
 If you have faith in God, then surely you already are halfway to your success because having faith in God means being optimistic, being positive and looking on the brighter side of things. The other half of the way will be successful only if you put your hard work, your perspiration and you dedication into your work my dear. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. 
 Where there is a will, there is a way and where there is hard work, there is definitely success waiting at the end of the road. May God bless you. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. 
 I know the times lately have been very difficult for you. I just need you to know that you will surely get over this time because this is just a phase in life that everyone will have to get through. May God bless you, dear. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. 
 Please always stay optimistic and always look for a positive sign out there. Please, I want you to never ever give up in whatever hard work that you are doing my dear one. May God bless you. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. 
 Advertisement 
 If you work hard, if you perspire enough, then you shall definitely be blessed with success and happiness. May God bless you my dears. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. 
 May you shall find the strength to fight all evils and all the troubles that come your way. I always want you to achieve what you want in life and I shall always be here for you whenever you are in need of any sort of help. I shall be here. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. May God bless you, friends. 
 Make sure that you are doing everything and putting your heart and energy into what is best for you. The difficulties, the troubles will definitely be there on your road to success. The important things are how you choose to tackle and handle them my dear one. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. May God bless you always. 
 Blessings are given only to those who work enough and who perspire enough for their dreams and aspirations my dear one. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. May God bless every one of us. 
 In this chaos of madness and this many populations, you may find difficult to make the correct decisions for your life and for your future but believe me, if you are optimistic and if you have faith in God, nothing will seem difficult or nothing will seem impossible to attain my dear one. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. May God bless. 
 With the wishes of your loved ones and with the blessings of God, each and every single thing will seem just right and just light. Everything will look simpler and will seem easier. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. May God bless you and your family. 
 If you work hard and if you dedicate your time into making your dreams come into reality and take a life form of its own, then my dear, you definitely need to open your eyes and ears. You need to be wise and you definitely need to take advice from elders and your loved ones. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. God bless you my love. 
 Making enemies are easy but making friends are difficult. So always be kind to every single person because you do not know who you might need when the right time comes. Always work hard my dear one. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. May God bless you. 
 If you dream big, you will definitely need to work extra hard for your dreams to come to life. always work hard my dear but at the same time, do not forget to make time for your family and friends as well because times will be very lonely if you only work and not spend time with your loved ones. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. Have faith in the almighty power of God. He will definitely bless those who need His help and His love. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. May God be with you. 
 The divine power of the almighty God is something that no one can deny of. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. May God bless you and be with your thoughts. 
 You have been studying a lot lately because the important exams are just approaching really near. So my dear love, study extra hard because this is your last chance to prove yourself. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. May god continue to bless you and all of us. 
 If you have enough faith in God, then you do not have to ever worry about anything in life. Just be honest and be a hard worker. Always be kind and gentle and have a kind heart, always remember to spread kindness and teach others to be kind always. If all the people of the world are kind then definitely, the world shall become a better place. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. 
 May you find the motivation, the inspiration and the dedication that you shall need to attain success in life. May you always be the one to make the most correct and the wisest decisions in life. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. May god continue to bless you. 
 You should know that God loves each and every one of us equally and dearly. My dear innocent one, no one can escape the eyes of God because God is everywhere, even within us in our souls and our spirits. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. May God bless you with happiness. 
 If you work hard and if you believe in yourself that you can do it, then believe me my dear one, you definitely will be showered with happiness and lots of blessings from the almighty God. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. May God bless you with love. 
 You can never know the miracles that God can make in the lives of each and every one of us. We will always be cared for and loved by God because all of us are His children, my dear. So have faith and leave the rest to God. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. 
 Be kind, be gentle and always be yourself. Do not ever commit anything wrong in your life because that shall be a sin. Always make good decisions in life. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear.God bless you my love. 
 Always have faith in the almighty and just believe in yourself my dear one. If you believe in yourself and if you put your time and energy into your work, then no doubt that you will attain nothing but success in your path and in your career and in your life my dear one. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. 
 Advertisement 
 Have faith in the almighty and leave the rest by just putting in your hard work into your tasks dear one. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. May god continue to bless you with good things. 
 If you work hard and if you have a moral that is positive, you will surely achieve success in your life my dear one. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. God bless you my love. 
 Always be bright, always shine and always be kind my dear one. Always stay happy and always stay positive my dear. And also do not forget to smile my dear. God bless you my love. 
 May God always bless you, your family, your loved ones and all of your near and dear ones my dear. May you find the strength to always do the right thing my dear one. May God bless you. 
 Wishing and praying that may God always be kind to you and your family my dear. May God always bless you. You can always seek the comfort in the warmth of your loved ones. 
 What makes you strong is not only your good will but your strong heart, your strong spirit and your determination to keep doing the right things for the betterment. May God always bless. Always smile and always be brave and courageous my dear one. 
 May you shall always be blessed with the strength and the power to overcome all of the hurdles that come your way my dear one. May God always bless you. Always smile and always be brave. 
 If you work hard, you shall definitely be rewarded for sure. Always smile and always be brave and courageous my dear one. 
 Work hard, be kind, be brave and of course have the honesty and the courage to make the right decisions my dear one. May God always bless us. Always smile and always be brave and courageous my dear one. 
 Have a good soul my dear one. Always try to take advice from your elders and the ones who care. May God always bless you. Always be humble and kind 
 It is not so easy to do good deeds in life but my dear, with the power and blessings of God, nothing is ever impossible my dear. May God always bless you and I hope that you always stay happy. 
 Please do not ever stress over small things in life because if you have faith in God, you will overcome just anything, my dear. So have faith in God and may God bless you every single day. 
 May God always bless you with the blessings and the good wishes my dear. I hope you will always find success wherever you go my dear one. May God bless you. 
 Always make time for your family and friends even though you are piled up with your works because having a good time once in a while with your loved ones is so important. May God bless you my dear one. 
 May God bless you my dear one. Always stay happy and always keep on smiling because if you smile then you are sure to go for miles and miles on the road to success. 
 Always stay positive and never be negative my dear. May God bless you my dear one. Always stay bright and happy lie you always are. 
 May God bless you my dear one. I will only wish the best and only the best for you. So always stay happy and always remember to smile my dear. 
 Please if you need me, please take a look around and find help with your loved ones. Other than that, you surely have my help whenever you need me. Do not always stay by yourself. It might result in sadness you know. May God bless you my dear one. Just stay happy my dear. 
 Preach God in every good and positive task that you plan to do. Spread the word of God and you will definitely find more peace in your mind and soul my dear one. May God bless you my dear one. 
 If you work hard and if you are focused enough my dear one, nothing can stop you from achieving what you want from life. May God bless you my dear one. 
 My dear one always is kind and smart at the same time. Take advice from your elders to make the wisest decisions. Always stay positive my dear and always try to stay happy as well. May God bless you my dear one. 
 Where there is light, there is the love and the blessings of the almighty God. Always try to be positive by searching the light oh my dear one. May God bless you my dear one. I will hope only the best for you. 
 My dear one always works hard for your dreams. If your dreams are big, then you need to work hard. The bigger the dreams, the harder you should work my dear. May God bless you my dear one. 
 Let God guide you through your pain and suffering. Time will heal everything, my dear. May God bless you my dear one. Try to stay positive. 
 I am very sorry to hear the news of your loss, my dear. May God bless you my dear one. May God give you the strength to overcome this difficult phase of your life. 
 Let God help you through your times of difficulty my dear one. Let love heal this pain. Let faith be the medicine for your troubles my dear one. May God bless you my dear one. 
 May God bless you my dear one. May you find the strength to destroy all of your evils. You will only find forgiveness if you are truly sorry for all of the wrongdoings. Let God decide what is right and what is wrong. On your behalf, just try to do the right thing, my dear. 
 You should know that God tests our faith always. In happiness, our gratitude is tested and in sadness, our darkness is tested but at all times, our obedience is tested. May God bless you my dear one. 
 If you are happy, people around you will be happy, if you are in sadness, you spread sadness. So try to be happy at least for your loved ones. May God bless you my dear one. 
 Have a strong ambition, have a strong faith, have a determination and you shall surely know the way. Another thing that you shall acquire is the blessing of God so always pray to God my dear. May God bless you my dear one. 
 Pray to the almighty God and He shall definitely shower you with love and happiness and of course His blessings. You can never be happy without God’s blessings. 
 Advertisement 
 May you will always be happy oh my dear one. Always be kind and always be generous my dear. Always pray to God at least once in a day to keep your faith alive. May God bless you my dear one. 
 May God bless you, my dear loved people. Always try to smile even when times may not seem right my dear. 
 May God bless you my dear one. Have faith in God my dear because if you do so, then you shall surely be a successful person in life. 
 May God bless you, my dear friend. Always work hard and always have a strong determination in your life to get the job done. 
 Whatever you do, do it with honesty, with sincerity, with a heart full of determination and always keep yourself motivated because that is the key to success. May God bless you my dear one. 
 May God bless you my dear one. I hope that you shall always stay optimistic because if you stay positive, then the world around you shall be positive my dear one. 
 Stay safe, stay motivated and stay happy and of course have lots of faith in God my dear one. May God bless you my dear one. 
 Always try to do the right things in life and always make the wisest decisions. May God bless you my dear one. And I hope that you shall always find happiness in your life my dear one. 
 Make time for yourself. Do not always engage in work my dear one. Make time to enjoy life too. May God bless you my dear one. Always stay happy and always remember to smile every single day my dear. 
 You will only have a bright and successful future if you put in enough hard work and enough determination to achieve and fulfill your dreams my dear. May God bless you my dear one. Always smile and always try to stay happy oh my dear one. 
 Always love your family, always love your friends and always care for your well-wishers my dear one. May God bless you my dear one. Always smile and always try to stay really very happy my dear one. 
 I hope and pray to God that you will definitely a path for yourself on your own my dear one. May God bless you my dear one. May you achieve what you want to achieve in life, my dear. Stay happy and always smile a lot more every single day. 
 May God bless you my dear one. May you always spend your energy on doing the right stuff because if you are on the wrong path, then you are on the way to your doom. So always make the correct decision and always be very wise about what you do in life. May God bless you mine. 
 Spend your time and your energy into your tasks and always expect better result every single time my dear. May God bless you my dear one. Always stay happy and always keep on smiling my dear. 
 Always have a smile on your face and always stay true to your own self. May God bless you my dear one. Do not pretend something that you are not. 
 I hope that you are doing well for yourself my dear. I hope that you are fine and I hope that you are happy with everything that you have achieved in life, my dear. May God bless you my dear one. 
 May God fill your soul and your spirit with lots of courage, kindness, love and hope my dear. May God bless you my dear one. If you are kind and loving, you will be awarded for sure my dear. Always stay happy and always remember to smile every single day my dear. 
 May God bless you and be with you. Always stay happy and always smile more every single day my dear. If you stay positive, you will definitely get positive feedbacks, my dear. So stay optimistic and expect the unexpected, my dear. 
 May God bless you my dear one. I hope that you will always work hard and always be determined in every task that you want to accomplish. I hope that you will always be honest and motivate in all of your life my dear. Always stay happy and always smile more every single day my dear. I just pray that you will be surrounded by love and happiness all around because you deserve a break from all of the hard works that you have done in your life, my dear. 
 May God bless you, my dear. I pray that you always stay happy and always smile more every single day my dear. Always be prepared for all of the hurdles that life may throw at you. You do not have to break down. You can always seek the comfort in the warmth of your loved ones and you can always remember God and ask for His kind love and all of His blessing my dear one. Always be positive and never be negative about anything that you do. It is because if you are negative, nothing will seem right but if you are always positive, then everything will seem just perfect and fine at the time. 
 Hopefully, you have enjoyed all of the above-mentioned wishes. You can always try to do simple clever things while wishing others. Always be kind, gentle, humble and honest. Your strength is your family so you should never ever take them for granted. Have great days and years ahead of guys and of course hopefully you, too, have a great time having fun. If you liked our suggestions then please do write to us in the comment section. Constructive criticism is highly appreciated. Do not forget to like and comment and share the article. We wish that we were helpful in any way possible and will always be ready to serve you. 
 Happy Birthday dear friend, I pray that your big day remains full of all the glory and therefore the marvel of God’s unfailing love and will you’re feeling his presence performing on your life all throughout the approaching 
 Every day could be a nice day to celebrate God’s extraordinary However these days could be a nice day to celebrate you, one in all God’s most wondrous creations, extraordinary birthday. May God bless you with all his glorious blessings. 
 May God bless you always on your birthday my cousin 
 Happy Birthday to you. May God shower you with all the blessings you really On your birthday, I would like that your relationship with God can become even stronger which God’s love can keep you going. Best Birthday to my dear cousin. 
 On your big day, I pray that God can still heat your heart and raise your spirits whereas granting you peace and serenity on this terribly big day of yours. Best Birthday. May God still bless you with all the extraordinary things in life my dear cousin. 
 The road of religion might is not the simplest to require. This is often the rationale why God provides all of us option to proceed our own. Therefore be happy and celebrate the wonderful decisions you created on your life on this big day of yours. Best Birthday my dearest cousin. 
 May God bless you always on your birthday, my cousin 
 Smile, for it’s your birthday. May God still shower you with such a big amount of blessings for you really need to be happy. Best Birthday. 
 Birthdays aren’t concerning presents, however, it’s concerning God’s presence too, cheers to you. Extraordinary 
 Rejoice, for this is often the day that God created Please grasp that I’m very proud to become a section of your extraordinary journey in life. You could have got a beautiful birthday then several nice years ahead Happy Birthday. 
 May God bless you always on your birthday, my cousin 
 Today is one in all the foremost special days that God has created. As a result of it’s your birthday, extraordinary birthday my dearest cousin. 
 God won’t count the candles you’ve got on your cake nor the cash in your checking account. It’s the love in your soul that’s what’s additional vital. Extraordinary 
 Best Birthday my dear cousin. I always wish to the immortal god that God can still bless you to the fullest and grant you continued peace and prosperity all throughout your life. 
 May Jesus bless you always on your birthday, my cousin 
 Wonderful Birthday to you. May the immortal god still keep you young and nice trying all year round. Each day of your life is actually a present from heaven higher than. Confirm that you just molding off the paper and lavish on what’s within. 
 Enjoy your big day and god will bless you with such a big amount of additional years to return and a good life to measure Happy Birthday. 
 May God bless you always on your birthday, my cousin 
 Best Birthday dearest cousin. May the approaching years of your life are full of new discoveries of God’s love and goodness. Wonderful birthday. Many thanks for having us May you still receive God’s blessings in every and each day of your life. 
 Happy birthday. Always keep in mind that celebrating a birthday is that the same as tally what proportion blessings you’ve got received in life. Therefore be grateful, for God has really blessed you a lot. Happy birthday dearest cousin. 
 May God bless you always on your birthday, my cousin 
 Happy Birthday. On nowadays, celebrate life and celebrate happiness too. MayGod still blesses you with such a big amount of extraordinary things in life. Remember that God walks together with you on this birthday of yours. However, there’ll be several of your friends walking with you still. Happy Birthday dear cousin. 
 Wonderful Birthday. May peace be upon you as you add another year to your life and will God grant all the wishes of your heart. On your birthday, remember it in mind that God is walking with you every and each step of your journey. Therefore glad that it’s your birthday. Best birthday dearest cousin brother. 
 Celebrate your birthday however always remember to convey because of God for the numerous extraordinary belongings you have received in life. Wonderful Birthday to you. May you’ve got a blessed day and a good life ahead. God Bless you. 
 May God bless you always on your birthday, my cousin 
 You are created by God according to his own mindset. That alone is enough to provide you with some big reasons to celebrate your life. Best Birthday to you. May the immortal god still offer you with enough strength to blow all those candles in your cake. However, just in case you wish to facilitate, I’m here for you usually. Happy Birthday my cousin. 
 If the Lord permits and, therefore, the creeks don’t rise, then I’ll be there to assist blow all the candles on your cake. Happy Birthday my sweetest and dearest cousin. 
 May God bless you always on your birthday, my cousin 
 I am undecided if it’s very your birthday or if you simply like to sneeze tons as a result of God has blessed you with most extraordinary life. I hope you may have a really wonderful day on your birthday and will you’ve got extraordinary years ahead. Happy Birthday. 
 On your birthday, may you be full of peace, joy, and laughter all year round! Through the years, as you proceed along with your journey in life, could you still strengthen lives and produce glory to our God. Best Birthday. 
 May God bless you always on your birthday, my cousin 
 Today isn’t solely each day to celebrate your birthday. However conjointly each day to celebrate a good gift from God. Thanks for coming back to our lives, extraordinary birthday to my sweetest and cutest cousin brother. 
 Happy birthday. It’s time to celebrate your birthday and therefore the life that God has given you. You should feel nice for you were created by God. Happy birthday and will God still bless you. Wishing you a really extraordinary May you’ve got an incredible day and nine years to come. Especially, may God grant all the wishes and desires in your heart. 
 May God bless you always on your birthday, my cousin 
 101. My prayer on this birthday of yours could be a life that’s full of most joy and happiness. Happy Birthday. I hope that you just can have a beautiful day and plenty of additional blessed years ahead. Extraordinary Birthday and will God still bless you and your family. 
 Dad is the ones that take all the trouble for you in your life. So a message with a prayer for the dad on his birthday will do a world of good for dad. 
 So look for the most beautiful prayer message to be sent to dad on his birthday and make your dad’s birthday special: 
 happy birthday daddy may god bless you 
 102. On this brilliant day, I implore that God will give an approach for you to accomplish each craving of your heart. May you never know trouble throughout everyday life? Have a favored birthday, my hero dad. 
 103. My supplication for you as you commend your birthday, father, is that distress never discovers its way to your doorstep, may your life continue splashing the celestial favors and love of God, may you have a great year ahead. 
 104. Father, as you praise your Big Day, may the all-powerful God bless your head with oil and enable your glass to keep running over all the times of your astounding life. Happy birthday. 
 happy birthday daddy may god bless you 
 105. On this day, Dad, may God control each and every progression you take throughout everyday life and lead you to goals that fill your heart with bliss and satisfaction? Cheerful birthday. 
 happy birthday daddy may god bless you 
 106. Celebrate, for this is the day that God made you! If it’s not too much trouble realize that I am extremely pleased to wind up a piece of your brilliant adventure throughout everyday life. May you have a brilliant birthday thus numerous incredible years ahead! Cheerful birthday father, may God bless you with a numerous successful life! 
 happy birthday dad may god bless you 
 107. The street of confidence may not be the most straightforward to take. This is the motivation behind why God gives us a decision to go without anyone else. So be glad and commend the astounding decisions you made on your life on this extraordinary day of yours. Best Birthday dad, may God provide with a lot of happiness in the years to come. 
 happy birthday dad may Jesus bless you 
 108. Dear cherished Dad, my birthday supplication for you is that you will keep on receiving quality from above to withstand all the searing darts of the mischievous one. Glad birthday. 
 109. On this brilliant day, I implore that God will give an approach for you to accomplish each craving of your heart. May you never know trouble throughout everyday life? Have a favored birthday. 
 happy birthday dad may god bless you 
 110. May you discover extraordinary bravery to never let yourself and family down regardless of what moves you may confront? What’s more, may the great Lord dependably have the motivation to grin down on you? Glad birthday. 
 111. It’s your confidence that will make you remain solid yet it’s your birthday celebrations that make you old. So on this birthday of yours, I ask that your confidence in God will develop considerably more grounded, best birthday super daddy, God will always bless you with love. 
 happy birthday dad may Allah bless you 
 112. On your birthday, I supplicate that you will discover joy in each progression that you go up against your trip through life, may Allah favor you bounteously on your uncommon day. 
 113. It is my earnest supplication that the Allah will keep you protected from the mishap and dependably open you to wealth and favorable luck. 
 happy birthday dad may Allah bless you 
 114. Cheerful Birthday! I ask that your unique day will be loaded with all the eminence and ponder of Allah’s unfailing affection and May you feel his essence chipping away at your life all through the coming years! Happy birthday dad 
 115. Magnificent Birthday my hero! I express gratitude toward Allah for controlling you through until this day. May His beauty and finish you generally! 
 happy birthday dad may Allah bless you 
 116. Keep in mind that we are on the whole unique in Allah’s sight. On your birthday, may you be honored with such a significant number of superb circumstances in the coming years and numerous happy returns throughout your life! Best Birthday dad! 
 117. On your birthday, my desire is for Allah to keep on pouring out his favors into your life and to your loved ones. Be set up to get God’s favors for there will clearly be loads of them. Cheerful Birthday daddy! 
 May God bless you wishing messages on your birthday dad 
 118. I can thank constantly the Almighty God for the gift my existence with such a superb individual like you. May the great Lord keep on showering you with joy, favorable luck, flourishing and great wellbeing all the times of your life, happy birthday my hero! 
 May God bless you wishing messages on your birthday dad 
 119. Happy Birthday, father! May God keep on showering you with every one of the endowments you really merit! 
 120. On this day, may you feel the Lord’s cherishing nearness working in your life! Make the most of your day for you should be happy. Brilliant birthday daddy! 
 121. Cheerful Birthday dad! May God keep on sheltering you in His care! Keep in mind that in each day of your life there is somebody up there that is looking down on you. 
 May God bless you wishing messages on your birthday dad 
 122. May the Almighty God dependably be your deliverer and shield all the times of your life? What’s more, may He generally fill your heart with all the bliss in this whole universe? Have an astounding birthday, my dear father. 
 best wishes – may god bless you on your birthday dad 
 123. As you commend your Big Day, I need you to realize that with God each and every fantasy of yours is conceivable. May God enable you to accomplish everything you could ever hope for, dear dad, and may He let your heart never know trouble. Happy birthday. 
 May Jesus bless you wishing messages on your birthday dad 
 124. May the Lord control you through circumstances of vulnerability, lift you over your feelings of trepidation and set your feet on the strong ground. Appreciate this awesome day of yours with the learning that God has you in His palms. Cheerful birthday father. 
 best wishes – may god bless you on your birthday dad 
 125. May you get quality at whatever point you are feeble and peace at whatever point you are grieved? May you have the valor to cruise through every one of the battles that may come to your direction. Remain favored. Happy birthday my hero. 
 best wishes – may Jesus bless you on your birthday dad 
 126. May you discover extraordinary bravery to never let yourself and family down regardless of what moves you may confront? What’s more, may the great Lord dependably have the motivation to grin down on you? Happy birthday super dad. 
 God bless you always and forever 
 Following are the messages telling how God will always take care of us. No matter in which situation we are and wishing them luck. God bless messages are here written to motivate people to be a better person. These messages help people to recognize their weaknesses. 
 They help them to improve themselves. They help them to build up the character. They even motivate to influence others to be a better person. These messages let them know they are not alone. They will learn to love God and not fear. They will know that the world is itself a heaven. 
 127) Trust God, trust his timing, his methods, his ways because a divine shift is coming your way. 
 128) May the deity’s light guide through your life ahead 
 129) May God bless you with what you didn’t know you needed 
 130) May our heavenly parents love us unconditionally 
 131) May God has a special and unique place in his plan 
 132) May your life be blessed with love, joy, and peace 
 Text Messages on May Jesus bless you always and forever 
 133) May God resides in your heart always and shows you your way 
 134) Always expect great things each and every moment and God will always bless you 
 135) May God give you a happy life not a perfect life 
 136) May God give you the knowledge of when you were born and why you were born 
 137) Start from where you are, make the source with what you have and start doing what you can God will always be there for you. 
 Text Messages on May god bless you always and forever 
 138) may God give you the power of trying and dealing with an error no matter how much you fail 
 139) May each and every morning brings you a new opportunity and faith 
 140) May God always stands besides you 
 141) God never sends you alone in any situation 
 142) God is that shadow who always walks behind you 
 143) God blesses you in every pursuit of your life 
 144) God always be with you in the act of your giving 
 Text Messages on May god bless you always and forever 
 145) God always keeps watch on you and turns every battle of yours into blessings 
 146) God is always working on you using his time and pressure turning you into a diamond which always shines 
 147) May Almighty God always loves you, gives you peace, serves you and motivates you 
 148) May God always hands over his blessings to you 
 149) When you look back in your life you will gain experience, when you look forward you will get hope, when you look inside your heart you will get God 
 Text Messages on May god bless you always and forever 
 150) May you find your dreams, hopes, peace, love, security, achieve your goals and shine like sun. God bless you. 
 151) May God give you strong heart, great love and unbreakable confidence 
 152) May God give you strength to face your fears and become better person 
 Advertisement 
 Tweet Tweet Share reddit Messenger Share Pinterest 99Shares 

 id="file23242755" filename="non-religious-word-for-blessed" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/235192/non-religious-word-for-blessed">
 Stack Exchange Network 
 Stack Exchange network consists of 178 Q&A communities including Stack Overflow, the largest, most trusted online community for developers to learn, share their knowledge, and build their careers. 
 your communities 
 English Language & Usage Stack Exchange is a question and answer site for linguists, etymologists, and serious English language enthusiasts. It only takes a minute to sign up. 
 Connect and share knowledge within a single location that is structured and easy to search. 
 I want to say on social media that I am blessed to have my daughter, but I am not religious and find it awkward when people respond saying that they are sending prayers my way. I appreciate the sentiment, but I'd still like a non-religious word that holds a similar connotation. 
 Given current usage, I very much doubt blessed is strictly considered religious (whatever that might mean). A similar word is thankful, which is rarely ever ascribed to any deity in particular in popular usage. 
 I've had multiple experiences of people taking religious connotations. And happy doesn't quite cover it. 
 4 Answers 4 
 From a religious point of view, being blessed has two parts. The first part is to have been endowed with divine favor. The second part is to be joyful for having received the blessing. 
 No doubt that as a new father you feel any one of these, from the second part: overjoyed, jubilant, exultant, elated, gleeful, delighted, or wonderful. None of these attributes your feeling to any outside influence. With these words, a thesaurus can be used to give you additional ideas. 
 21.7k22 gold badges3737 silver badges7676 bronze badges 
 1 
 I like the breakdown and I believe overjoyed, elated, and delighted work for me. Thanks. 
 By clicking “Accept all cookies , you agree Stack Exchange can store cookies on your device and disclose information in accordance with our Cookie Policy. 

 id="file23242553" filename="order-for-a-blessing-to-be-used-in-various-circumstances" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.usccb.org/prayer-and-worship/sacraments-and-sacramentals/sacramentals-blessings/order-for-a-blessing-to-be-used-in-various-circumstances">
 Order for a Blessing to Be Used in Various Circumstances 
 Introduction 
 1984 Since the present rite provides a wide choice of texts, it can be readily adapted for use in various circumstances. The purpose of the rite is to sanctify through the celebration of a blessing those situations in life not explicitly indicated in the rites already given (for example, a gathering of family members or of a group for some special occasion; a collection of contributions for the poor, etc.). 1985 The present order is in no sense meant to violate principles concerning blessings; it is not fitting to turn every object or situation into an occasion for celebrating a blessing (for example, every monument erected no matter what its theme, the installation of military weapons, frivolous events). Rather every celebration must be considered with balanced pastoral judgment, particularly when there is any foreseeable danger of shocking the faithful or other people. 1986 The present order may be used by a priest or deacon. It may also be used by a layperson, who follows the rites and prayers designated for a lay minister. While maintaining the structure and chief elements of the rite, the minister should adapt the celebration to the circumstances of the place and the people involved..Order of Blessing 
 Order of Blessing 
 Introductory Rites 
 1987 When the community has gathered, the minister says: 
 In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. 
 All make the sign of the cross and reply: 
 Amen. 
 1988 A minister who is a priest or deacon greets those present in the following or other suitable words, taken mainly from sacred Scripture. 
 May God, who is the fountain of all goodness, be with you all. 
 All make the following or some other suitable reply. 
 And also with you. 
 1989 A lay minister greets those present in the following words. 
 Brothers and sisters, let us bless and praise the Lord, the fountain of all goodness. Blessed be God now and for ever. 
 All reply: 
 Amen. 
 1990 In the following or similar words, the minister prepares those present for the blessing. 
 All that God has created and sustains, all the events he guides, and all human works that are good and have a good purpose, prompt those who believe to praise and bless the Lord with hearts and voices. He is the source and origin of every blessing. By this celebration we proclaim our belief that all things work together for the good of those who fear and love God. We are sure that in all things we must seek the help of God, so that in complete reliance on his will .we may in Christ do everything for his glory. 
 Reading of the Word of God 
 1991 A reader, another person present, or the minister reads a text of sacred Scripture. 
 Brothers and sisters, listen to the words of the apostle Paul to the Colossians: 
 1:9b-14 Multiplying good works o f every sort. We do not cease praying for you and asking that you may be filled with the knowledge of his will through all spiritual wisdom and understanding to live in a manner worthy of the Lord, so as to be fully pleasing, in every good work bearing fruit and growing in the knowledge of God, strengthened with every power, in accord with his glorious might, for all endurance and patience, with joy giving thanks to the Father, who has made you fit to share in the inheritance of the holy ones in light. He delivered us from the power of darkness and transferred us to the kingdom of his beloved Son, in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins. 
 1992 Or: 
 Brothers and sisters, listen to the words of the apostle Paul to the Romans: 
 8:24-28 The Spirit too helps us in our weakness. For in hope we were saved. Now hope that sees for itself is not hope. For who hopes for what one sees? But if we hope for what we do not see, we wait with endurance. In the same way, the Spirit too comes to the aid of our weakness; for we do not know how to pray as we ought, but the Spirit itself intercedes with inexpressible groanings. And the one who searches hearts knows what is the intention of the Spirit, because it intercedes for the holy ones according to God's will. We know that all things work for good for those who love God, who are called according to his purpose. 
 1993 Or: 
 Brothers and sisters, listen to the words of the first letter of Paul to Timothy: 
 4:4-5 Everything God created is good. For everything created by God is good, and nothing is to be rejected when received with thanksgiving, for it is made holy by the invocation of God in prayer. 
 1994 Or: Numbers 6:22-27-So shall they invoke my name upon the Israelites and I will bless them. Deuteronomy 33:1, 13b-16a-This is the blessing of Moses. Wisdom 13:1-7-For from the greatness and beauty of created things, their original author, by analogy, is seen. Sirach 18:1-9-Who can measure God's mighty deeds? 1995 As circumstances suggest, one of the following responsorial psalms may be sung or said, or some other suitable song. 
 R. The Lord led his people out with rejoicing. 
 Psalm 105 
 Give thanks to the LORD, invoke his name; make known among the nations his deeds. Sing to him, sing his praise, proclaim all his wondrous deeds. R. Glory in his holy name; rejoice, O hearts that seek the LORD! Look to the LORD in his strength; seek to serve him constantly. R. Recall the wondrous deeds that he has wrought, his portents, and the judgments he has uttered. He, the LORD, is our God; throughout the earth his judgments prevail. R. He remembers forever his covenant which he made binding for a thousand generations- which he entered into with Abraham and by his oath to Isaac. R. 
 Psalm 106:2-3, 4-5, 45-46, 47, 48 
 R. (v. 1) Give thanks to the Lord for he is good, his love is everlasting. 
 Psalm 107:2-3, 8-9, 31-32, 42-43 
 R. (v. 6) They cried to the Lord in their troubles and he delivered them from their anguish. 
 1996 As circumstances suggest, the minister may give those present a brief explanation of the biblical text, so that they may understand through faith the meaning of the celebration. 
 Intercessions 
 1997 As circumstances suggest, the prayer of blessing may be preceded by the intercessions. The minister introduces them and an assisting minister or one of those present announces the intentions. From the following intentions those best suited to the occasion may be used or adapted, or other intentions that apply to the particular circumstances may be composed. The intentions are followed immediately by the prayer of blessing, nos. 1999-2008. The minister says: 
 God loves his creation and his goodness sustains the universe. Let us pray now that he will bestow his blessing upon us and that he will renew and support us with his strength. 
 R. Lord, send us your blessing. 
 Or: 
 9. Lord, hear our prayer. 
 Assisting minister: 
 Everlasting God, you give life a nobler meaning when we try wholeheartedly to do your will; fill us with the spirit of your own holiness. (For this we pray:) R. 
 Assisting minister: 
 You want us to increase your gifts and to return them to you and to our neighbor; accept the offering of our loving service. (For this we pray:) R. 
 Assisting minister: 
 You watch over us with fatherly care; hear the cries of those who trust in you. (For this we pray:) R. 
 Assisting minister: 
 You sent your Son into the world to remove the curse of sin and replace it with your blessing; in Christ fill us with every heavenly blessing. (For this we pray:) R. 
 Assisting minister: 
 You have poured forth into our hearts your Son's Spirit, in whom we cry out, Abba, Father; hear your children as they acclaim and praise your goodness. (For this we pray:) 
 Assisting minister: 
 Through your Son's death and resurrection you have chosen us to be your people and your inheritance; remember us in our needs and bless your inheritance. (For this we pray:)R. 
 1998 When there are no intercessions, the minister, before the prayer of blessing, says: 
 Let us pray. 
 As circumstances suggest, all may then pray for a moment in silence before the prayer of blessing. 
 1999 A minister who is a priest or deacon says the prayer of blessing with hands outstretched; a lay minister says the prayer with hands joined. 
 2000 Blessing of natural products 
 Blessed are you, O God, Creator of the universe, who have made all things good and given the earth for us to cultivate. Grant that we may always use created things gratefully and share your gifts with those in need, out of love for Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with you for ever and ever. 
 R. Amen. 
 2001 Blessing of natural products 
 Lord and Father all-holy, we bless you, for your word and power have made all things and your gift has given us what we need to live. Grant that, in obedience to your law and will, your faithful may always use created things in a spirit of gratitude. We ask this through Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen. 
 2002 Blessing of natural products 
 Almighty and everlasting God, by your design for us you have given us the temporal blessings we need, in order to bring us to the blessings of eternity. Grant us the goods of this world sufficient to meet our needs, and lead us to the heavenly inheritance you have promised. We ask this through Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen. 
 2003 Blessing of manufactured things 
 Almighty and ever-living God, you made us stewards over the created world, so that in all things we might honor the demands of charity. Graciously hear cur prayers, that your blessing may come upon all those who use these objects for their needs. Let them always see you as the good surpassing every good and love their neighbor with upright hearts. We ask this through Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen. 
 2004 Blessing for the special occasions of life 
 Lord God, from the abundance of your mercy enrich your servants and safeguard them. Strengthened by your blessing, may they always be thankful to you and bless you with unending joy. We ask this through Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen. 
 2005 Blessing for the special occasions of life 
 Lord, let the effect of your blessing remain with your faithful people to give them new life and strength of spirit, so that the power of your love will enable them to accomplish what is right and good. We ask this through Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen. 
 2006 Blessing for the special occasions of life 
 Lord, may the blessing they long for be the strength of your faithful people, so that they will never be in conflict with your will. May your blessing always prompt them to give thanks for your favors. We ask this through Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen. 
 2007 Blessing for the special occasions of life 
 Bless your people, Lord, who wait for the gift of your compassion. Grant that what they desire by your inspiration they may receive through your goodness. We ask this through Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen. 
 2008 Blessing for the special occasions of life 
 Lord, we, your people, pray for the gift of your holy blessing to ward off every harm and to bring to fulfillment every right desire. We ask this through Christ our Lord. 
 R. Amen. 
 Concluding Rite 
 2009 A minister who is a priest or deacon concludes the rite by saying: 
 May God, who is blessed above all, bless you in all things through Christ, so that whatever happens in your lives will work together for your good. 
 R. Amen. 
 Then he blesses all present. 
 And may almighty God bless you, the Father, and the Son, + and the Holy Spirit. 
 R. Amen. 
 2010 A lay minister concludes the rite by signing himself or herself with the sign of the cross and saying: 
 May God, who is blessed above all, bless us in all things through Christ, so that whatever happens in our lives will work together for our good. 
 R. Amen. 
 2011 It is preferable to end the celebration with a suitable song. 

 id="file23242559" filename="politics-of-blessing-genesis-27" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://politicaltheology.com/politics-of-blessing-genesis-27/">
 Members of Congress commemorated the 12th anniversary of the 9/11 terror attacks with a ceremony on the steps of the U.S. Capitol, singing “God Bless America.  
 Politics of Blessing (Genesis 27) 
 This week, on the heels of the 12th anniversary commemorations of the September 11th tragedy on US soil, many Americans have returned to the biblical refrain of divine blessing. 
 The Politics of Blessing in Genesis 27:1-4, 15-23 and 28:10-17 
 This week’s scripture (from the Narrative Lectionary) is actually taken from two chapters in Genesis—27 & 28. The plot of Genesis 27 is, broadly speaking, about Isaac granting final blessings to his sons. In essence, this is his will and testament and, following custom, Isaac intends to will everything to his eldest son Esau. However, as the story goes, God—and Rebekah—have other plans. Through their interventions, Isaac grants the blessing intended for Esau to Jacob instead. 
 The lectionary leaves Isaac’s actual words out, but they are recorded in vv. 28-29: 
 May God give you of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the earth, and plenty of grain and wine. Let peoples serve you, and nations bow down to you. Be lord over your brothers, and may your mother’s sons bow down to you. Cursed be everyone who curses you, and blessed be everyone who blesses you!’ 
 Again, following tradition, Isaac is formulaically granting his son rights to all of the riches and power that he has amassed and praying that God, following the promise to his father Abraham, might multiply these blessings for this son—Jacob, whom Isaac believes to be Esau. In this very human way, Isaac’s blessing for his son is concerned with wealth and power—to the point that anyone who curses this new patriarch should himself be cursed. 
 In contrast, Genesis 28 is about—again, broadly speaking—Jacob living into this blessing and its subsequent role, which he has received by subterfuge. This chapter begins with Isaac giving a second blessing to his son Jacob, again, it would seem, at the behest of Rebekah, but now fully aware both of which son he is blessing and who is really in charge—neither Isaac, Jacob, or Rebekah, but God. Thus, the tone shifts in Isaac’s blessing for Jacob in Genesis 28:3-4. Rather than seeking to preserve power and possessions through a material heir, Isaac now prays, 
 ‘May God Almighty bless you and make you fruitful and numerous, that you may become a company of peoples. May he give to you the blessing of Abraham, to you and to your offspring with you, so that you may take possession of the land where you now live as an alien—land that God gave to Abraham.’ 
 And, indeed, this is the blessing that is confirmed for Jacob by God’s own voice through his encounter at Beer-sheba. As Jacob dreams, 
 The Lord stood beside him and said, “I am the Lord, the God of Abraham your father and the God of Isaac; the land on which you lie I will give to you and to your offspring; and your offspring shall be like the dust of the earth, and you shall spread abroad to the west and to the east and to the north and to the south; and all the families of the earth shall be blessed in you and in your offspring. Know that I am with you and will keep you wherever you go, and will bring you back to this land; for I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised you.  (vv.13-15) 
 Through this encounter, God powerfully reminds Isaac (and through him, Jacob, Esau, and the rest of us), that an inheritance in God’s Kingdom is not about wealth and power. 
 The Abrahamic blessing is, of course, tied to the land. It is a blessing of abundance, but not of fatness. It is a blessing primarily concerned with the well-being of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and their families, not with their lordship over everyone else. Moreover, it is a blessing through which “all of the families of the earth will be blessed —not cursed as Isaac’s original prayer would have had it! To be blessed by God, the texts makes clear, is therefore, first and always, to be a blessing. 
 This week, on the heels of the 12th anniversary commemorations of the September 11th tragedy on US soil, many Americans have returned to the biblical refrain of divine blessing. Continuing what has become an American tradition, the United States Congress flanked the steps of the US Capitol building last Wednesday to sing, “God Bless America.  The lyrics to Irving Berlin’s famous song intone a familiar blessing: 
 God bless America, land that I love, Stand beside her and guide her Through the night with a light from above. From the mountains, to the prairies, To the oceans white with foam, God bless America, My home sweet home. 
 Over the course of its public history, this song has meant many things. Sheryl Kaskowitz outlines this history in her book on the song, discussed recently on NPR’s All Things Considered. She describes the song’s original debut on the first American celebration of Armistice Day in 1938, in which it carried an anti-interventionist rhetoric, celebrating the peace and stability still to be found on American soil despite brewing chaos on the European front, its use by civil rights and labor activists, and ultimately, the solidification of “its more conservative uses, as upholding the status quo  during its use in the Vietnam era to quash protesters.[1] 
 Despite what Kaskowitz rightly names as ambiguous lyrics, which have allowed for such multifaceted use, for my generation this national hymn has too often become a symbol of the “fatness of the earth  kind of blessings that we both too quickly celebrate as already ours and too blithely hope, pray, and believe will remain ours forever. This, I believe, was Isaac’s initial mistake. 
 Interestingly, Berlin penned his song 20 years prior to its 1938 debut on Armistice Day. At that time (1918), before it would have had any fascist undercurrents, the initial lyrics prayed that God might “Stand beside her and guide her to the right with a light from above. [2] As we pray for God’s blessing on us as a nation, whether in America or in any other place across the globe, perhaps attention to this subtle difference might better shift nationalistic pride in and aspirations toward wealth and power towards God’s prayer for Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and for us: 
 “All the families of the earth shall be blessed in you and in your offspring  and “Know that I am with you wherever you go  (Genesis 28:14 and 15). 
 The Rev. Amy Lindeman Allen is an ordained minister in the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America and a fellow in theology and practice at Vanderbilt University in the area of New Testament and early Christianity. She and her family reside in Franklin, Tennessee where they attend the Lutheran Church of St. Andrew. 
 [This post is part of our series on the politics of scripture, which focuses on weekly preaching texts. We also welcome commentary on sacred, classic, and profane literature, film, and artistic expression. Submissions may be sent to 40bicycles@gmail.com.] 
 Amy Lindeman Allen is Assistant Professor of New Testament at Christian Theological Seminary and an ordained Lutheran minister (ELCA). She holds her PhD from Vanderbilt University and is interested in the intersections of God’s Word in scripture and the world. 

 id="file23242645" filename="polytheistic-theology-and-ethics" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://norse-mythology.org/concepts/polytheistic-theology-and-ethics/">
 Norse Theology 
 As far as we know, the Vikings never formulated their views on the divine in the abstract, conceptual language of theology or philosophy. Instead, they used the concrete imagery and narrative form of myth to portray divinity as they saw it. As unique and powerful as those mythical portrayals are, they leave us wondering how the Vikings perceived divinity as such – in other words, what it means to be a god, not merely what specific gods do and have done. 
 Luckily, we can answer that question, at least to some degree. For while the Norse have left us no explicit theology, there is an implicit theology in those very myths. Formulating a Norse theology is therefore a matter of teasing out the theological implications of the depictions of the gods in the myths.[1] 
 The Numinous 
 Before we get to the specifically Norse conception of divinity, let’s define what we’re talking about in the first place. While divinity is notoriously impossible to adequately express in words of any sort – mythical, theological, or otherwise – some descriptions come much closer to the mark than others. 
 The best description of the divine to date is surely the German philosopher of religion Rudolf Otto’s classic 1917 book The Idea of the Holy. For Otto, the divine – or, to use his preferred term, the numinous – is something that presents itself as being “wholly other [2] than the things that we experience in our everyday, mundane lives. It seems to come from a different plane of existence altogether. Confronted with it, one experiences oneself as being “but dust and ashes, [3] utterly insignificant and inconsequential in the face of something immeasurably greater. It has a majestic, daunting, even terrifying aspect, which Otto calls the mysterium tremendum (“awe-inspiring mystery ), as well as a blissful, comforting side, which he calls the mysterium fascinosum (“alluring mystery ) or simply fascinans.[4] 
 The Norse gods were – in addition to all of the other things they were – images of this universal, inscrutable force that were drawn from the particulars of the Viking world, which made them especially fitting ways of imagining and connecting with the divine in that time and place. 
 Some deities represented specific aspects of the numinous more than other aspects. For example, Odin, the mighty but devious chieftain who ruled through arcane wisdom and magical power, would have naturally evoked the sublime but frightening side of the divine. Tyr or Freya, by contrast, were much more straightforwardly beneficent, prosocial, and comforting, which made them particularly effective images of the “lighter  side of the numinous. 
 The Pillars of the Cosmos 
 The most widely-used Old Norse word for “god  was áss (pronounced “OWS ), or æsir (pronounced “EYE-seer ) in the plural (“gods ). Its corresponding feminine form for “goddess  was ásynja (pronounced “ow-SIN-ya ), or ásynjur (pronounced “ow-SIN-yur ) in the plural (“goddesses ). When referred to as a collective that included both gods and goddesses, the masculine plural æsir was used. These words are all derived from one of two Proto-Germanic roots: *ansaz, “pole, beam, rafter,  or *ansuz, “life, vitality. [5] 
 This powerfully suggests that the Vikings thought of their gods as the “poles  or “vital forces  that held together and sustained the cosmos and its order. 
 And, indeed, this is exactly what we find in their myths. The gods were very much a part of the cosmos rather than beings who merely manipulated it from the outside. When the cosmos arose, they arose with it as part of the same process. And when the cosmos will fall, as the Norse believed it would at Ragnarok, the gods will fall with it. 
 But even though the gods were part of the cosmos, they weren’t just ordinary members of it. The structure of the cosmos was seen as analogous to the Norse social hierarchy, with the gods and goddesses as the rulers (Old Norse regin, pronounced roughly “RAY-gen,  another common word for the gods) who established and enforced the order of the cosmic system as a whole, to which any and all other inhabitants of the cosmos were subject. 
 The gods reigned over other beings, but just as any medieval ruler was obligated to protect his or her people from foreign aggressors, so too were the gods obligated to protect the cosmos from the forces of chaos – the giants – who wished to destroy it. 
 Language, myth, and social practice all complemented and reinforced each other here, which points to this having been one of the most central parts of the implicit Norse theology. 
 There Was No Norse “Supreme Being  
 While the power of the Norse gods was extreme, it wasn’t total. There was no “supreme being  in the Norse religion. Instead, even the gods were subject to limitations. These limitations basically fell into two categories. 
 First, since the Vikings worshiped many gods, each of which had a personality and role distinct from the others, no one deity possessed all of the powers that were attributed to the gods as a whole. Some gods were better warriors than others; some were wiser than others; some were more skilled than others at blessing lands, crops, livestock, and people with prosperity and fertility; and so forth. 
 Perhaps the most telling example of this is Odin, who was famed for his almost unmatched knowledge and wisdom. Yet even he had to go on numerous trying quests to learn that lore; it wasn’t simply innate within him. (See, for example, the tales of Odin’s Discovery of the Runes, Why Odin Is One-Eyed, and The Mead of Poetry.) 
 The second way in which the gods’ power was limited was that even they couldn’t escape being subject to fate. They, too, were doomed to have various misfortunes befall them, to suffer, and ultimately, at Ragnarok – Old Norse Ragnarök, “Final Fate of the Gods [6] – to die. 
 The Relationship Between the Gods and Humans 
 By this point, it should go without saying that the Norse thought of their gods as highly anthropomorphic beings – that is, they were very much like humans, just writ large. Even their spiritual nature didn’t separate them absolutely from humans, or, for that matter, from the rest of the physical world. Just as humans had a material part and a spiritual part or parts, the gods, though spiritual, manifested themselves in various physical phenomena. In the lingo of philosophy of religion, this is called a “theophany  (the manifestation of a god) or a “hierophany  (the manifestation of the sacred). 
 For example, Thor, whose very name meant “Thunder,  was not so much the “god of thunder  as he was the god thunder – the divinity whose presence the Vikings felt in the thunder. His wife, the goddess Sif, was known for her long, luscious, golden hair that seems to have symbolized fields of ripe grain.[8] Sif would therefore have been the goddess grain, and the storms fertilizing the vegetation would have been practically a ritual enactment of the consummation of the marriage of Thor and Sif.[9] 
 This wasn’t exactly pantheism, the idea that all of nature or the physical world is divine. There’s no indication that the Norse thought that the physical world in its entirety manifested the gods. But parts of the physical world certainly were thought to embody them. (It’s extremely doubtful that there was ever a firm list of which parts did so; the Norse seem to have treated this as more of an “I know it when I see it  kind of thing.) 
 Since the gods were imagined to have human characteristics, and since they regularly manifested themselves in, and intervened in, the affairs of the world, it was possible for humans and gods to interact with each other. Such interactions were an essential part of Norse religiosity. 
 This occurred in countless different ways, the most intimate of which was the belief that the gods copulated with humans in order to found royal and heroic families.[10][11] 
 The most common interaction between the gods and humans happened through ritual sacrifice, the cornerstone of Norse religious practice. The pragmatically-minded Norse didn’t only worship their gods out of a sense of wonder or love. They also usually wanted to get something in particular from the gods. 
 In human interactions, if you want to get something from someone – at least in a way that maintains a healthy relationship between the two of you – you have to give that person something in return. Since the gods were so much like humans, when humans wanted something from the gods, they had to give them something of value, too. This was the logic of sacrifice: by piously offering the gods a gift, their human worshipers hoped to receive gifts from them. 
 This reciprocity between the gifts of the gods and humans mirrored the more strictly human reciprocity between a Viking warrior and his chieftain. The warrior who fought bravely and loyally for his chieftain would be rewarded with his share of whatever spoils were taken in the battle or raid. Despite the unequal status between the warrior and his chieftain, and the unequal status between humans and gods, both parties in these transactions had obligations to the other that they were expected to fulfill. The warrior had obligations to his chieftain, who in turn had obligations to him; and humans had obligations to the gods, but the gods in turn had obligations to them.[12] When human worshipers performed the appropriate sacrifices, they could legitimately expect the gods to bless them with victory in battle, bountiful harvests, sexual fertility, or whatever it was they sought. 
 There was an element of unconditional fealty present in the chieftain-warrior relationship as well, exemplified by the expectation that an honorable warrior would sooner die by his chieftain’s side than flee and live. But this was largely subsumed by the sense of mutual obligation; a Viking warrior could choose to whom he offered his mortal loyalty, and leave one chieftain for another if he thought that another would treat him with more generosity.[13] 
 As chieftains became kings and Christianity triumphed in the later part of the Viking Age, the emphasis was reversed. The relationship between the king and his fighters – which had necessarily become much more impersonal with the great increase in the number of fighters each king commanded – was spoken of in terms borrowed from Christian language. No longer did humans and gods have reciprocal obligations to one another, in which both parties participated more or less voluntarily and held a dignified position despite their immense inequality. In the same way that medieval Christians were supposed to serve God unconditionally as his “slaves and thralls,  so, too, were a king’s men supposed to serve him.[14] What had previously been a contract or a bargain was replaced with decree, fiat, commandment. 
 Looking for more great information on Norse mythology and religion? While this site provides the ultimate online introduction to the topic, my book The Viking Spirit provides the ultimate introduction to Norse mythology and religion period. I’ve also written a popular list of The 10 Best Norse Mythology Books, which you’ll probably find helpful in your pursuit. 
 References: 
 [1] For the terminology of “explicit theology  and “implicit theology,  I’m indebted to Jan Assmann. See: 
 Assmann, Jan. 2001. The Search for God in Ancient Egypt. Translated by David Lorton. 
 [2] Otto, Rudolf. 1958. The Idea of the Holy. Translated by John W. Harvey. p. 25-30. 
 [3] Ibid. p. 9. 
 [4] Ibid. p. 12-40. 
 [5] Orel, Vladimir. 2003. A Handbook of Germanic Etymology. p. 20-21. 
 [6] Simek, Rudolf. 1993. Dictionary of Northern Mythology. Translated by Angela Hall. p. 259. 
 [7] Orel, Vladimir. 2003. A Handbook of Germanic Etymology. p. 429. 
 [8] Ellis-Davidson, Hilda Roderick. 1964. Gods and Myths of Northern Europe. p. 84. 
 [9] The term for this basic idea, common to many ancient religions, is a “hierogamy  (“divine marriage ), which typically takes place between a sky god and an earth goddess. See, for example: 
 Eliade, Mircea. 1959. The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion. Translated by Willard R. Trask. p. 145-146. 
 [10] Turville-Petre, E.O.G. 1964. Myth and Religion of the North: The Religion of Ancient Scandinavia. p. 56, 70. 
 [11] Snorri Sturluson. Ynglinga Saga 4-13. In Heimskringla: eða Sögur Noregs Konunga. 
 [12] Winroth, Anders. 2014. The Age of the Vikings. p. 143. 
 [13] Ibid. 
 [14] Ibid. 
 The Ultimate Online Guide to Norse Mythology and Religion 

 id="file23242576" filename="power-to-bless-through-jesus-christ" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.bible-knowledge.com/power-to-bless-through-jesus-christ/">
 The Power To Bless Through Jesus Christ 
 Another very powerful tool we have in our arsenal as born-again believers is the ability to bless other people in the name of Jesus. 
 I think this is one of those benefits that we have forgotten how powerful it really is. We are so used to praying before our meals and asking God to bless the food with which we are about to eat, that we forget how much further we can really go with this privilege that we have already received from the Lord. 
 The ability to bless other people and other things is an extremely powerful prayer tool and every Christian should try and do it on some kind of a regular basis, as you never know how far God will actually work with you in this realm. 
 Here are some of the definitions on exactly what a blessing is from some of the different Bible Dictionaries: 
 To bestow happiness or prosperity upon; praise and glorify 
 Pronouncement of God’s gracious favor 
 The act of declaring, or extending through pronouncement, God’s favor and goodness upon others 
 For those of you who were not aware of this incredible privilege that we have already received from the Lord, I will go ahead and give you some of the key verses from the Bible showing you that we have been definitely granted this type of authority and privilege from the Lord. I will then end this article giving you some examples of how you can use this powerful privilege in the name of Jesus. 
 As you will see with some of the examples I will give you below, there is literally an infinite number of things and situations that you can try and bless in the name of Jesus. And when you do bless other people or other situations, real life spiritual transactions can actually take place with the person or situation you are blessing. In other words, the Holy Spirit can actually move to impart the specific blessing that you have just prayed over someone. 
 The Scripture Verses 
 Here are 16 very good verses showing the wide variety of situations in which blessings were granted, either direct by God the Father, Jesus Christ, or some of His own people back in both the Old and New Testaments. 
 “Assuredly, I say to you, whoever does not receive the kingdom of God as a little child will by no means enter it.  And He took them up in His arms and blessed them. (Mark 10:15-16) 
 “The curse of the Lord is on the house of the wicked, but He blesses the habitation of the just.  (Proverbs 3:33) 
 “And He led them out as far as Bethany, and He lifted up His hands and blessed them. Now it came to pass, while He blessed them, that He was parted from them and carried up into heaven.  (Luke 24:50) 
 “Then He took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, He blessed and broke them, and gave them to the disciples to set before the multitudes.  (Luke 9:16) 
 Then she spoke out with a loud voice and said, “Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb!  (Luke 1:42) 
 “So Joshua blessed them and sent them away, and they went to their tents.  (Joshua 22:6) 
 “You are the sons of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with your fathers, saying to Abraham, ‘And in your seed all the families of the earth shall be blessed.'  (Acts 3:25) 
 “When you have eaten and are full, then you shall bless the Lord your God for the good land which He has given you.  (Deuteronomy 8:10) 
 “Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all of His benefits.  (Psalm 103:2) 
 “With it we bless our God and Father, and with it we curse men, who have been made in the similitude of God.  (James 3:9) 
 “Otherwise if you bless with the spirit, how will he who occupies the place of the uniformed say “Amen  at your giving of thanks, since he does not understand what you say?  (1 Corinthians 14:16) 
 “The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?  (1 Corinthians 10:16) 
 And God blessed them, saying, “Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let birds multiply on the earth.  (Genesis 1:22) 
 “But I say to you, love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you, and pray for those who spitefully use you and persecute you.  (Matthew 5:44) 
 “Bless those who persecute you; bless and do not curse.  (Romans 12:14) 
 “But whatever house you enter, first say, ‘Peace to this house.’ And if the son of peace is there, your peace will rest on it; if not, it will return to you.  (Luke 10:5-6) 
 Notice in addition to God being able to directly bless us and we blessing other people in His name, that we can also directly bless God ourselves. 
 As you can see from the above verses, not only did God the Father bless in the Old Testament and Jesus blessed in the New Testament, but both the apostles in the New Testament and some of the patriarchs in the Old Testament also blessed others in the name of God. 
 When Jesus left and ascended to His Father, He told us to do what He did. He has thus given us His authority and His power to carry on His supernatural ministry. And part of that supernatural ministry is the right to be able to bestow blessings upon one another in His name. 
 Examples of What You Can Bless In the Name of Jesus 
 There are literally an infinite number of things you can bless in the name of Jesus. Just so you can see how far you can actually go with this privilege, here are a few examples. 
 Bless the food you eat at every meal. 
 Bless someone with peace if they have lost it due to an adverse development that may have just occurred in their life. 
 Bless the baby a mother is carrying in her womb, and ask God to bless the mother with a perfectly normal healthy baby. 
 Ask God to bless someone with a new job if they have just lost their job. 
 Ask God to bless someone with knowledge and wisdom if they are having a hard time in trying to solve a personal problem. 
 Ask God to bless your finances or someone else’s finances if they have run into trouble. 
 Ask God to bless your house or any other valuable personal items you may have. 
 Ask God to bless our country and our political leaders. Ask God to bless our leaders with His knowledge and wisdom so they can make the right decisions with the tough times we are now all facing. 
 Ask God to bless any new adventure or any new job you are now taking. 
 Ask God to personally bless you with His knowledge and wisdom so you can make all the right choices in this life. 
 Ask God to bless you with favor at your place of employment. 
 Bless the marriages of all of your children so they can stay under the hand and covering of God. 
 Bless others with joy, peace, and happiness in the Lord. 
 As you can see from these types of examples, there are just a wide variety of things that you can bless in the name of Jesus. You can pronounce blessings on yourself, other people, different type of situations like marriages and pregnancies, and actual objects like your houses and some of your personal items and possessions. 
 How to Word a Blessing 
 For those of you who are looking on how to word a blessing, here are a few suggestions using some of the above examples. 
 Father, in the name of Jesus, I ask that You bless the child in my wife’s womb and that You bless our child with perfect health and long life. 
 Father, I ask that You bless Joe with a new job since he has just lost his job. Bless him with the right job for Your glory, in Jesus name. 
 Father, please bless Susan with Your knowledge and wisdom to solve the personal problem that she is dealing with at work, in Jesus name. 
 Father, in the name of Jesus, I ask that You bless the new job that I am about to take. I ask that You bless this job and also bless me with favor with both my bosses and the people that I will now be working with. 
 Father, in the name of Jesus, I ask that You bless the marriage of my son Daniel and his new wife Tracy. I ask that You bless them with happiness, peace, joy, and long life in You. I ask that You also bless any children they may have. I ask that You bless each one of their children with perfect health and long life. 
 Father, in the name of Jesus, I ask that You bless this country and bless the leaders of our country. I ask that You specifically bless them with Your knowledge and wisdom so they can make the right choices to keep this country safe, strong, and secure in You. I ask all of this in Jesus name. 
 Again, there are just an infinite number of things or situations that you can actually pray a blessing over in the name of Jesus. 
 Conclusion 
 Many of us have heard the words, “God bless you,  so many times, that we really have forgotten what this principle is all about and how powerful it really is, especially if it is being done under the unction of the Holy Spirit. 
 Again, real life transactions can actually occur in the spiritual realm when we pronounce a blessing on someone or something. The Holy Spirit Himself can move on the person or situation that we are pronouncing the blessing over and actually impart exactly what we are blessing that someone with. 
 That is why it would help if you can be very specific with what you are blessing someone with as versus just doing a general type of blessing. 
 To those of you who have never really tried out this privilege we now have with the Lord, you might want to start experimenting with it, as you never know when God will move to actually back you up with what you are blessing. 
 Ask, and you just may receive some incredible blessings, for either yourself or someone else you may be blessing. 
 Blessings are treated very casually here. Rather than give Believers your (or man's) instructions, we know that God's Word can be made clear once a person is saved . At that time, the Holy Spirit covers us IMMEdiATELY. God states in His WORD that Christian leaders (chosen by God) should offer the names of teachers (also chosen by God) to new Believers. They, with the help of the Holy Spirit will learn the Bible (GOD's WORD), Then true Believers can be weaned from the milk (minimal understanding of the Bible) and know they cannot understand the Bible because "they are not of strong meat" until that time. Hebrews 5:12, Isaiah 28:9, all of Deuteronomy 18 - Who is speaking? And to Whom? 
 Gary L Goldstein 
 Wednesday 13th of April 2016 
 Too often "we want" God to bless us "we want" a wife. What does "God want?" If God knows it is in your best intrest that being a single man having a healthy relationship with God should be first. God will not give to us more than He knows we can handle. God's ways are not "our way." i asked, Father, & in your name Jesus Christ, i see in the acts of the Apostles and read how you said, And these signs follow them that believe: in my name....they SHALL speak with new tungues..? and you said in your word that heaven and earth SHALL pass away, but my words SHALL NOT PASS AWAY.. Why then has no minister been truthful with me? And this is what i prayed, instead of asking him to bless me with what " i want," i needed to know "His WILL for my life." Later i heard His voice, & He lead me to a man who had this evidence dwelling in him & the elders, & by obedience and faith in His holy word they laid hands on me and i received the baptism of the holy ghost! Ah-heat-toe amoe shaundah! Speaking in tongues as the Spirit of [the Living] God gives me the utterance! Men of God in Christ Jesus (Yeshuah) it is well for us to deny our selves: "our wants" our effections, so we can bless the Lord our God, & without distractions be ready for the glorious appearing when we have over come our own premise to do "What God Wants" For is it not written, For if any man come after me he must deny himself, & take up His cross and follow me? Delight yourself in the LORD, & he will give thee the desire of thine heart. The desire of my heart is to be acceptable in His sight,& to delight myself "in the Lord. to bless others by sharing the good news and in Spirit and in Truth. 
 Truth 
 Friday 18th of September 2015 
 Well if many of you were Blessed with a wife and family, that was an excellent gift for you. Then there are many of us good single men today that weren't blessed like that which many of us would've wanted that gift as well. 
 Grounded7 
 Wednesday 9th of September 2015 
 How to Word a Blessing 
 I am a bit saddened by the examples you give in the section How to Word a Blessing. Your examples are asking the Father to bless rather than do what Christ said he gave us power to do. If we are speaking a blessing over someone or something, we speak over them not ask someone else to do it. Example: Each morning before leaving for work I bless my wife by speaking works over her as she prepares to leave for work herself. I say to her; may your day be fruitful and prosperous, may your heart be filled with joy, peace and happiness, may your coworkers and your boss look upon you with favor, may the love of our Lord and Saviour be in your heart and may you be filled with His Spirit. Notice I did not ask the Father, the creator of all things to do the blessing. We are told to bless! When we look at the examples in Scripture where a blessing was spoken over another they spoke what blessing they wanted to come over the ones they were blessing. They did not ask the Father to do the blessing. 
 Now if I ask the Father to bless something or someone I ask that his blessing be upon it or them and I express in detail for what reason I ask him to bless. Example: When I ask the blessing over my meal, I go to the Father in this way. Oh LORD God of heaven and earth I thank you for this meal you have provided for my family, I ask that your blessing may be upon this food that it may be a blessing to our bodies for strength, health, nutrition and energy, I come unto you giving thanks a praise unto you by the authority given unto me by my LORD and Saviour Jesus the Christ. 
 The heavenly Father has given us the authority (in the name of Christ) to bless. When we do things in the name of Christ, this means we are doing something by his authority, he gave to us. Just as we would give a lawyer authority to speak and act on our behalf, Christ gave us the authority to speak and act on his behalf (in his place). 
 To bless someone is not to ask the Father to bless them with something, but for us to speak over them in the place of Christ. 
 May you be filled with knowledge and understanding of the truth spoken by Our LORD and Saviour Jesus Christ! 
 Shannon 
 Wednesday 14th of January 2015 
 Thank you so much for this compilation of scripture and the info about blessing.... Our Awesome Heavenly Father has been teaching me for several weeks a lesson between blessing and cursing and this morning the lesson has culminated I believe into the finality which is about blessing. I thank God for teaching me and I absolutely know that this is true because in my heart I was having difficulty with some leaders in my church and unfortunately I really was cursing them in my heart and did not even understand that that's what I was doing by complaining, by getting angry, by refusing to accept teaching, by standing in resistance to things that I was being told and even though it doesn't sound bad I came to understand that it was.... Thank God through his teaching this happened this morning and it was so powerful that He walked me through many different scriptures in my Bible study and the culmination was about blessing others and not cursing others and when I found this website many of the scriptures that were on the top where the same scripture that the Lord has brought to me over the last few weeks and one scripture that God brought to me in my teaching was about hypocrisy and I didn't understand where I was being a hypocrite but now I do. The hypocrisy was in my heart because by not blessing someone and having all of those ungodliness' (as I listed) in my heart I was actually cursing them even without knowing it and once I was obedient to the Father and truly did bless these people with my mouth and in my heart my entire body collapsed I had to lay down I fell asleep because I was cursing myself and once I let go and truly did bless these people in my heart God could actually bless me and heal me this is the most amazing most powerful gift that God has given each and every Christian praise God and I bless you Father in Jesus name 

 id="file23242541" filename="prayer.php_p_198" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.catholic.org/prayers/prayer.php?p=198">
 Hi readers, it seems you use Catholic Online a lot; that's great! It's a little awkward to ask, but we need your help. If you have already donated, we sincerely thank you. We're not salespeople, but we depend on donations averaging $14.76 and fewer than 1% of readers give. If you donate just $5.00, the price of your coffee, Catholic Online School could keep thriving. Thank you. 
 Blessing of an Automobile 
 Printable PDF V. Our help is in the name of the Lord. R. Who has made heaven and earth. V. The Lord be with you. R. And with your spirit. Let us pray. Lend a willing ear, Lord God, to our prayers, and bless this vehicle with Your holy right hand. Direct Your holy angels to accompany it, that they may free those who ride in it from all dangers, and always guard them. And just as by Your deacon Philip You gave faith and grace to the man of Ethiopia as he sat in his chariot reading the Sacred Word, so, point out to Your servants the way of salvation. Grant that, aided by Your grace, and with their hearts set on good works, they may, after all the joys and sorrows of this journey through life, merit to receive eternal joys, through Christ our Lord. R. Amen. (And it is sprinkled with holy water.) 
 Hi readers, it seems you use Catholic Online a lot; that's great! It's a little awkward to ask, but we need your help. If you have already donated, we sincerely thank you. We're not salespeople, but we depend on donations averaging $14.76 and fewer than 1% of readers give. If you donate just $5.00, the price of your coffee, Catholic Online School could keep thriving. Thank you. Help Now > 
 Search Search Prayers 
 More Travel Prayers (8) 
 Make a journey, typically of some length or abroad. 
 Hi readers, it seems you use Catholic Online a lot; that's great! It's a little awkward to ask, but we need your help. If you have already donated, we sincerely thank you. We're not salespeople, but we depend on donations averaging $14.76 and fewer than 1% of readers give. If you donate just $5.00, the price of your coffee, Catholic Online School could keep thriving. Thank you. Help Now 
 Shop Prayers 
 Over 3,000 Catholic prayers sorted by topic/keyword. Including morning & night prayers, marriage and basic prayers like Hail Mary, Our Father, Apostles' Creed and many more. 
 Please don't scroll past this. We interrupt your reading to humbly ask you to defend Catholic Online School's independence. 98% of our readers don't give; they look the other way. If you are an exceptional reader who has already donated, we sincerely thank you. If you donate just $10.00, or whatever you can, Catholic Online School could keep thriving for years. Most people donate because Catholic Online School is useful. If Catholic Online School has given you $10.00 worth of knowledge this year, take a minute to donate. Show the world that access to Catholic education matters to you. Thank you. 
 Join the Movement When you sign up below, you don't just join an email list - you're joining an entire movement for Free world class Catholic education. 
 Catholic Online is a Project of Your Catholic Voice Foundation, a Not-for-Profit Corporation. Your Catholic Voice Foundation has been granted a recognition of tax exemption under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. Federal Tax Identification Number: 81-0596847. Your gift is tax-deductible as allowed by law. 
 × 
 Please don't scroll past this 
 Hi readers, it seems you use Catholic Online a lot; that's great! It's a little awkward to ask, but we need your help. If you have already donated, we sincerely thank you. We're not salespeople, but we depend on donations averaging $14.76 and fewer than 1% of readers give. If you donate just $5.00, the price of your coffee, Catholic Online School could keep thriving. Thank you. Help Now 

 id="file23242540" filename="prayers-and-blessings-for-pets-and-animals" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://prayerstanthony.wordpress.com/2011/01/25/prayers-and-blessings-for-pets-and-animals/">
 Prayers and Blessings for Pets and Animals 
 Catholic Prayers & Blessings for Cats, Dogs, and Other Pets and Animals 
 St. Francis said, “those who will exclude any of God’s creatures from the shelter of compassion and pity will deal likewise with their fellow man.  The Catholic Tradition respects animals as God’s creatures, worthy of our care. While the Catholic Church has no dogma about the ultimate fate of animals, some theologians have speculated that all creation, including animals, will be made new in the end. However, the Church cautions against spending so much time and money on the care of animals that humans are neglected. These pet prayers and blessings are either from, or in the spirit of, the Catholic Tradition. 
 A Prayer for Our Pets 
 O God, you have redeemed all creation through the incarnation of your eternal Word; Protect our pets, your creatures, who provide us with joy and nonjudgmental companionship; Give us respect for all of your Word-redeemed creation, that we may care for creation as just and humble stewards; We pray this in the name of the same Word, Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with you and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. David Bennett. 
 A Pet Blessing 
 Dearest God, Heavenly Father maker of all living creatures, we ask you to bless (name of pet), who brings so much joy into our lives. By the power of Your love, enable him (her) to live according to your plan. May we always praise You for all Your beauty in creation. who lives and reigns with you and the Holy Spirit, Blessed are You, God, in all Your creatures! Basilica and Shrine of Our Lady of Consolation. 
 Blessing of an Animal 
 Almighty and Generous Providence how great the variety of living things, You have put at our disposal! You told our first parents: “I give you all the animals of the land.  Some can be used as food, or for labor or transportation, but also for our companionship and recreation. 
 Bless this animal. May it carry out the function it has been given and may it aid us to think of You its Creator and give praise and thanks to You forever. We ask this in the name of Jesus our Lord. New St. Joseph People’s Prayer Book. 
 Prayer of Saint Francis for Animals 
 God Our Heavenly Father, You created the world to serve humanity’s needs and to lead them to You. By our own fault we have lost the beautiful relationship which we once had with all your creation. Help us to see that by restoring our relationship with You we will also restore it with all Your creation. Give us the grace to see all animals as gifts from You and to treat them with respect for they are Your creation. 
 We pray for all animals who are suffering as a result of our neglect. May the order You originally established be once again restored to the whole world through the intercession of the Glorious Virgin Mary, the prayers of Saint Francis and the merits of Your Son, Our Lord Jesus Christ Who lives and reigns with You now and forever. Amen. St. Francis of Assisi, additions added later 
 Prayer for a Lost Pet 
 Father We ask you to help us find ________, our dear pet who is now lost. We know that you placed animals on the earth for many reasons, including companionship for man. We therefore ask you to help us find our lost companion, and pray that You will keep him (her) safe and protect him (her) from harm until he (she) is found. We join our prayers with St. Francis, St. Anthony of Padua, and all the saints, and pray in the name of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen David Bennett 
 Prayer for a Sick Pet 
 Heavenly Father, Please help us in our time of need, You have made us stewards of (name of pet). If it is Your will, please restore him (her) to health and strength. I pray too for other animals in need. May they be treated with the care and respect deserving of all Your creation. Blessed are You Lord God, and holy is Your name for ever and ever Basilica and Shrine of Our Lady of Consolation. 
 Prayer in Memory of a Pet 
 Almighty God, I was fortunate to receive the gift of (pet name) from You Now that he (she) has left this life, please help me cope with my loss with strength and courage. I know that my beloved companion no longer suffers, and will live on in many fond memories. May they be treated with the care and respect As he (she) has enriched my life, I pray that I may enrich the lives of others. Amen. Basilica and Shrine of Our Lady of Consolation. 
 Prayer for Animals and Their Masters 
 Hear our humble prayer, O God, for our friends, the animals, especially for those who are suffering; for animals that are overworked, underfed, and cruelly treated; for all the wistful creatures in captivity, that beat their wings against bars; for any that are hunted or lost or deserted, or frightened or hungry; for all that must be put to death. 
 We entreat for them all Thy mercy and pity, and for those who deal with them, we ask a heart of compassion and gentle hands and kindly words. Make us, ourselves, to be true friends to animals and so to share the blessings of the Merciful. Albert Schweitzer, from a Catholic Prayer Book 

 id="file23242557" filename="Prosperity_theology" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prosperity_theology">
 Prosperity theology 
 Prosperity theology (sometimes referred to as the prosperity gospel, the health and wealth gospel, the gospel of success, or seed faith)[A] is a religious belief among some Protestant Christians that financial blessing and physical well-being are always the will of God for them, and that faith, positive speech, and donations to religious causes will increase one's material wealth.[1] 
 Prosperity theology has been criticized by leaders from various Christian denominations, including within some Pentecostal and charismatic movements, who maintain that it is irresponsible, promotes idolatry, and is contrary to the Bible.[2] Secular as well as some Christian observers have also criticized prosperity theology as exploitative of the poor. The practices of some preachers have attracted scandal and some have been charged with financial fraud. 
 Prosperity theology views the Bible as a contract between God and humans: if humans have faith in God, he will deliver security and prosperity.[3] The doctrine emphasizes the importance of personal empowerment, proposing that it is God's will for his people to be blessed. The atonement (reconciliation with God) is interpreted to include the alleviation of sickness and poverty, which are viewed as curses to be broken by faith. This is believed to be achieved through donations of money, visualization, and positive confession. 
 According to historian Kate Bowler, the prosperity gospel was formed from the intersection of three different ideologies: Pentecostalism, New Thought, and "an American gospel of pragmatism, individualism, and upward mobility".[13] This "American gospel" was best exemplified by Andrew Carnegie's Gospel of Wealth and Russell Conwell's famous sermon "Acres of Diamonds", in which Conwell equated poverty with sin and asserted that anyone could become rich through hard work. This gospel of wealth, however, was an expression of Muscular Christianity and understood success to be the result of personal effort rather than divine intervention.[14] 
 The New Thought movement, which emerged in the 1880s, was responsible for popularizing belief in the power of the mind to achieve prosperity. While initially focused on achieving mental and physical health, New Thought teachers such as Charles Fillmore made material success a major emphasis of the movement.[15] By the 20th century, New Thought concepts had saturated American popular culture, being common features of both self-help literature and popular psychology.[16] 
 E. W. Kenyon, a Baptist minister and adherent of the Higher Life movement, is credited with introducing mind-power teachings into early Pentecostalism.[17] In the 1890s, Kenyon attended Emerson College of Oratory where he was exposed to the New Thought movement. Kenyon later became connected with well-known Pentecostal leaders and wrote about supernatural revelation and positive declarations. His writing influenced leaders of the nascent prosperity movement during the post-war American healing revival. Kenyon and later leaders in the prosperity movement have denied that he was influenced by the New Thought movement. Anthropologist Simon Coleman argues that there are "obvious parallels" between Kenyon's teachings and New Thought.[18] 
 Kenyon taught that Christ's substitutionary atonement secured for believers a right to divine healing. This was attained through positive, faith-filled speech; the spoken word of God allowed believers to appropriate the same spiritual power that God used to create the world and attain the provisions promised in Christ's death and resurrection.[19] Prayer was understood to be a binding, legal act. Rather than asking, Kenyon taught believers to demand healing since they were already legally entitled to receive it.[20] 
 Kenyon's blend of evangelical religion and mind-power beliefs—what he termed "overcoming faith"—resonated with a small but influential segment of the Pentecostal movement.[21] Pentecostals had always been committed to faith healing, and the movement also possessed a strong belief in the power of speech (in particular speaking in tongues and the use of the names of God, especially the name of Jesus).[22] Kenyon's ideas would be reflected in the teachings of Pentecostal evangelists F. F. Bosworth and John G. Lake (who co-led a congregation with New Thought author Albert C. Grier prior to 1915).[23] 
 While Kenyon's teachings on overcoming faith laid the groundwork for the prosperity gospel, the first generation of Pentecostals influenced by him and other figures, such as Bosworth, did not view faith as a means to attain material prosperity. In fact, early Pentecostals tended to view prosperity as a threat to a person's spiritual well-being.[24][25] By the 1940s and 1950s, however, a recognizable form of the doctrine began to take shape within the Pentecostal movement through the teachings of deliverance and healing evangelists. Combining prosperity teaching with revivalism and faith healing, these evangelists taught "the laws of faith ('ask and ye shall receive') and the laws of divine reciprocity ('give and it will be given back unto you')".[26] 
 Oral Roberts began teaching prosperity theology in 1947.[5] He explained the laws of faith as a "blessing pact" in which God would return donations "seven fold",[27] promising that donors would receive back from unexpected sources the money they donated to him. Roberts offered to return any donation that did not lead to an equivalent unexpected payment.[5] In the 1970s, Roberts characterized his blessing pact teaching as the "seed faith" doctrine: donations were a form of "seed" which would grow in value and be returned to the donor.[27][28] Roberts began recruiting "partners", wealthy donors who received exclusive conference invitations and ministry access in exchange for support.[29] 
 In 1953, faith healer A. A. Allen published The Secret to Scriptural Financial Success and promoted merchandise such as "miracle tent shavings" and prayer cloths anointed with "miracle oil".[6] In the late 1950s, Allen increasingly focused on prosperity. He taught that faith could miraculously solve financial problems and claimed to have had a miraculous experience in which God supernaturally changed one-dollar bills into twenty-dollar bills to allow him to pay his debts.[30] Allen taught the "word of faith" or the power to speak something into being.[6] 
 In the 1960s, prosperity became a primary focus in healing revivals.[31] T. L. Osborn began emphasizing prosperity in the 1960s and became known for his often ostentatious displays of personal wealth.[8] During that decade, Roberts and William Branham criticized other prosperity ministries, arguing that their fund-raising tactics unfairly pressured attendees. These tactics were prompted in part by the expense of developing nationwide radio networks and campaign schedules.[31] At the same time, leaders of the Pentecostal Assemblies of God denomination often criticized the focus on prosperity taken by independent healing evangelists.[32] 
 During the 1960s, prosperity gospel teachers embraced televangelism and came to dominate religious programming in the United States. Oral Roberts was among the first, developing a syndicated weekly program that became the most watched religious show in the United States. By 1968, television had supplanted the tent meeting in his ministry.[33] 
 Reverend Ike, a pastor from New York City, began preaching about prosperity in the late 1960s. He soon had widely aired radio and television programs and became distinguished for his flashy style. His openness about love for material possessions and teachings about the "Science of the Mind" led many evangelists to distance themselves from him.[11] 
 In the 1980s, public attention in the United States was drawn to prosperity theology through the influence of prominent televangelists such as Jim Bakker. Bakker's influence waned, however, after he was implicated in a high-profile scandal.[9][C] In the aftermath, Trinity Broadcasting Network (TBN) emerged as the dominant force in prosperity televangelism, having brought Robert Tilton and Benny Hinn to prominence.[7] 
 Although nearly all of the healing evangelists of the 1940s and 1950s taught that faith could bring financial rewards, a new prosperity-oriented teaching developed in the 1970s that differed from the one taught by Pentecostal evangelists of the 1950s. This "Positive Confession" or "Word of Faith" movement taught that a Christian with faith can speak into existence anything consistent with the will of God.[34] 
 Kenneth Hagin was credited with a key role in the expansion of prosperity theology. He founded the RHEMA Bible Training Center in 1974, and over the next 20 years, the school trained more than 10,000 students in his theology.[35] As is true of other prosperity movements, there is no theological governing body for the Word of Faith movement, and well-known ministries differ on some theological issues,[36] though many ministries are unofficially linked.[10] The teachings of Kenneth Hagin have been described by Candy Gunther Brown of Indiana University as the most "orthodox" form of Word of Faith prosperity teaching.[12] 
 By the late 2000s, proponents claimed that tens of millions of Christians had accepted prosperity theology.[37] The neo-Pentecostal movement has been characterized in part by an emphasis on prosperity theology,[38] which gained greater acceptance within charismatic Christianity during the late 1990s.[39] In the 2000s, Evangelical-Pentecostal churches teaching prosperity theology saw significant growth in the Global South and Third World countries.[40][41][42][43] According to Philip Jenkins of Pennsylvania State University, poor citizens of impoverished countries often find the doctrine appealing because of their economic powerlessness and the doctrine's emphasis on miracles.[44] One region seeing explosive growth is Western Africa, particularly Nigeria.[40][42] In the Philippines, the El Shaddai movement, part of the Catholic Charismatic Renewal, has spread prosperity theology outside Protestant Christianity.[45] One South Korean prosperity church, Yoido Full Gospel Church, gained attention in the 1990s by claiming to be the world's largest congregation.[46] 
 A 2006 poll by Time reported that 17 percent of Christians in America said they identified with the movement.[9] By the 2000s, adherents of prosperity theology in the United States were most common in the Sun Belt.[37] By 2006, three of the four largest congregations in the United States were teaching prosperity theology, and Joel Osteen has been credited with spreading it outside of the Pentecostal and Charismatic movement through his books, which have sold over 4 million copies.[9][D] Bruce Wilkinson's The Prayer of Jabez also sold millions of copies and invited readers to seek prosperity.[46] 
 In 2005, Matthew Ashimolowo, the founder of the largely African Kingsway International Christian Centre in southern England, which preaches a "health and wealth" gospel and collects regular tithes, was ordered by the Charity Commission to repay money he had appropriated for his personal use. In 2017, the organisation was under criminal investigation after a leading member was found by a court in 2015 to have operated a Ponzi scheme between 2007 and 2011, losing or spending £8 million of investors' money.[47] 
 Proponents of prosperity theology often cite the parable of the talents (here depicted in a 1712 woodcut) 
 Prosperity theology teaches that Christians are entitled to well-being and, because spiritual and physical realities are seen as one inseparable reality, interprets well-being as physical health and economic prosperity.[51] Teachers of the doctrine focus on personal empowerment,[52] promoting a positive view of the spirit and body. They maintain that Christians have been given power over creation because they are made in the image of God and teach that positive confession allows Christians to exercise dominion over their souls and material objects around them.[52] Leaders of the movement view the atonement as providing for the alleviation of sickness, poverty, and spiritual corruption;[53] poverty and illness are cast as curses which can be broken by faith and righteous actions.[46] There are, however, some prosperity churches which seek a more moderate or reformed paradigm of prosperity.[12] Kirbyjon Caldwell, pastor of a Methodist mega-church, supports a theology of abundant life, teaching prosperity for the whole human being, which he sees as a path to combating poverty.[9][B] 
 Wealth is interpreted in prosperity theology as a blessing from God, obtained through a spiritual law of positive confession, visualization, and donations.[54] Believers may see this process in almost mechanical terms;[55] Kenneth Copeland, an American author and televangelist, argues that prosperity is governed by laws,[10] while other teachers portray the process formulaically.[53] Journalists David van Biema and Jeff Chu of Time have described Word of Faith pastor Creflo Dollar's teachings about prosperity as an inviolable contract between God and humanity.[9] 
 The prosperity theology teaching of positive confession stems from its proponents' view of scripture. The Bible is seen as a faith contract between God and believers; God is understood to be faithful and just, so believers must fulfill their end of the contract to receive God's promises. This leads to a belief in positive confession: the doctrine that believers may claim whatever they desire from God, simply by speaking it. Prosperity theology teaches that the Bible has promised prosperity for believers, so positive confession means that believers are speaking in faith what God has already spoken about them. Positive confession is practiced to bring about what is already believed-in; faith itself is a confession, and speaking it brings it into reality.[56] 
 The teaching often depends on non-traditional interpretations of Bible verses,[53] the Book of Malachi often being given special attention. While Christians have generally celebrated Malachi for its passages about the Messiah, teachers of prosperity theology usually draw attention to its descriptions of physical wealth.[57] Frequently quoted verses include: 
 Malachi 3:10: "'Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.'" (KJV)[9] 
 John 10:10: "'I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly.'" (KJV)[9] 
 Philippians 4:19: "My God shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus." (KJV)[53] 
 3 John 1:2: "Beloved, I wish above all things that thou mayest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospereth." (KJV)[5] 
 Prosperity theology casts itself as the reclamation of true doctrine and thus part of a path to Christian dominion over secular society.[39] It contends that God's promises of prosperity and victory to Israel in the Old Testament apply to New-Covenant Christians today, and that faith and holy actions release this prosperity.[52] C. Peter Wagner, a leader of the New Apostolic Reformation, has argued that if Christians take dominion over aspects of society, the Earth will experience "peace and prosperity".[58] Some Latin Americans who have embraced prosperity theology argue that Christianity has historically placed an unnecessary focus on suffering. They often view this as a Roman Catholic doctrine that should be discarded and replaced with an emphasis on prosperity.[59] Prosperity-theology advocates also argue that biblical promises of blessings awaiting the poor have been unnecessarily spiritualized, and should be understood literally.[60] 
 Prosperity churches place a strong emphasis on the importance of giving. Some services include a teaching-time focused on giving and prosperity, including Biblical references to tithing; and then a sermon on another topic which follows the offering. Prosperity-church leaders often claim that a specific blessing can be exchanged for the money being donated to their ministry; some have been reported to instruct worshipers to hold their donations above their heads during the prayer.[61] 
 Congregants in prosperity churches are encouraged to speak positive statements about aspects of their lives that they wish to see improved. These statements, known as "positive confessions" (distinct from confessions of sin), are said to miraculously change aspects of people's lives if spoken with faith.[62] Prosperity churches also encourage people to "live without limits"[63] and to cultivate optimism about their lives.[64] T. D. Jakes, pastor of The Potter's House non-denominational mega-church, has argued in favor of prosperity, rejecting what he sees as the demonization of success. He views poverty as a barrier to living a Christian life, suggesting that it is easier to make a positive impact on society when one is affluent.[63] 
 While some prosperity churches have a reputation for manipulating and alienating the poor,[65] many are involved in social programs. Underlying these programs is a theology of empowerment and human flourishing with the goal of releasing people from a "welfare" or "victim" mentality.[65] Many prosperity churches hold seminars on financial responsibility. Kate Bowler, an academic who studies prosperity theology, has criticized such seminars, arguing that though they contain some sound advice, the seminars often emphasize the purchase of expensive possessions.[37] Hanna Rosin of The Atlantic argues that prosperity theology contributed to the housing bubble that caused the late-2000s financial crisis. She maintains that prosperity churches heavily emphasized home ownership based on reliance on divine financial intervention that led to unwise choices based on actual financial ability.[37] 
 Most churches in the prosperity movement are non-denominational and independent, though some groups have formed networks.[10] Prosperity churches typically reject presbyterian polity (or governance) and the idea that a pastor should be accountable to elders; it is common for pastors of prosperity churches to be the highest organizational authority-figure.[66] Critics, including Sarah Posner and Joe Conason, maintain that prosperity teachers cultivate authoritarian organizations. They argue that leaders attempt to control the lives of adherents by claiming divinely-bestowed authority.[67] Jenkins contends that prosperity theology is used as a tool to justify the high salaries of pastors.[68] 
 In the United States, the movement has drawn many followers from the middle class[52] and is most popular in commuter towns and urban areas.[37] In Exporting the American Gospel: Global Christian Fundamentalism Steve Brouwer, Paul Gifford, and Susan Rose speculate that the movement was fueled by a prevailing disdain for social liberalism in the United States that began in the 1970s.[39][G] Rosin argues that prosperity theology emerged because of broader trends, particularly American economic optimism in the 1950s and 1990s. Tony Lin of the University of Virginia has also compared the teaching to manifest destiny,[37] the 19th-century belief that the United States was entitled to the West. Marvin Harris argues that the doctrine's focus on the material world is a symptom of the secularization of American religion. He sees it as an attempt to fulfill the American Dream by using supernatural power.[69] 
 Prosperity theology has become popular among poor Americans, particularly those who seek personal and social advancement.[52] It has seen significant growth in black and Hispanic churches and is particularly popular among immigrants.[37] Apologists for the movement note its ethnic diversity and argue that it encompasses a variety of views.[9] Joel Robbins of Cambridge University notes that most anthropologists attribute the theology's appeal to the poor—especially in the Global South—to the fact that it promises security and helps explain capitalism. Simon Coleman developed a theory based on the doctrine's rhetoric and the feeling of belonging it gave parishioners. In a study of the Swedish Word of Life Church, he noted that members felt part of a complex gift-exchange system, giving to God and then awaiting a gift in return (either from God directly or through another church member).[70] Hillsong Church, the largest congregation in Australia, teaches a form of prosperity theology that emphasizes personal success. Marion Maddox has argued that this message has drawn a significant number of upwardly mobile Australians.[71] Scott Morrison, who became the 30th Prime Minister of Australia in August 2018, is a member of Horizon Church, a Pentecostal church that believes in prosperity theology.[72][73] 
 In a 1998 interview in Christianity Today, Bong Rin Ro of the Asia Graduate School of Theology suggested that the growth in popularity of prosperity theology in South Korea reflects a strong "shamanistic influence". Bong pointed to parallels between the tradition of paying shamans for healing and the prosperity theology's contractual doctrine about giving and blessings. Asia's economic problems, he argued, encouraged the growth of the doctrine in South Korea, though he claims it ignores the poor and needy. During the interview, he stated that he saw the problem beginning to be reversed, citing calls for renewed faith and other practices.[74] Cho Yong-gi, pastor of Yoido Full Gospel Church in Seoul, has been criticized for shamanising Christianity. This criticism has focused on his healing and exorcism ministries and his promise of material blessings. Malaysian Christian writer Hwa Yung has defended Cho's healing and exorcism ministries, arguing that he successfully contextualized the Gospel in a culture where shamanism was still prevalent. However, Hwa criticizes Cho's teaching of earthly blessings for not reflecting a trust in God's daily provision and for their heavy focus on earthly wealth.[75] 
 Historian Carter Lindberg of Boston University has drawn parallels between contemporary prosperity theology and the medieval indulgence trade.[76] Comparisons have also been made to Calvinism, but John T. McNeill disputes the widespread semi-Weberian idea that Calvinism promoted the idea of prosperity as a marker of the elect.[77] Coleman notes that several pre–20th century Christian movements in the United States taught that a holy lifestyle was a path to prosperity and that God-ordained hard work would bring blessing.[25] 
 Coleman has speculated that modern-day prosperity theology borrows heavily from the New Thought movement, though he admits that the connection is sometimes unclear.[78] Jenkins notes that critics draw a parallel between prosperity theology and the cargo cult phenomenon.[46] While citing the popularity of prosperity theology in agrarian African communities, he argues that it can also bear similarities to traditional African religious rituals.[79] J. Matthew Wilson of Southern Methodist University compares the movement to Black theology owing to its focus on uplifting oppressed groups, though he notes that it differs in its concentration on individual success rather than corporate political change.[80] 
 Observers have proposed that some doctrines and beliefs found in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) are reminiscent of prosperity theology,[81] such as a similar interpretation of Malachi 3:10 found among LDS members as among Protestant prosperity theology and LDS lesson manuals teaching a "prosperity cycle" that shows material wealth follows from obedience to God.[82] 
 Mainstream evangelicalism has consistently opposed prosperity theology as heretical[37] and prosperity ministries have frequently come into conflict with other Christian groups, including those within the Pentecostal and Charismatic movements.[39] Critics, such as Evangelical pastor Michael Catt, have argued that prosperity theology has little in common with traditional Christian theology.[83] Prominent evangelical leaders, such as Rick Warren,[9] Ben Witherington III,[9] and Jerry Falwell,[84] have harshly criticized the movement, sometimes denouncing it as heretical.[9] Warren proposes that prosperity theology promotes the idolatry of money, and others argue that Jesus' teachings indicate a disdain for material wealth.[9] In Mark: Jesus, Servant and Savior, R. Kent Hughes notes that some 1st-century rabbis portrayed material blessings as a sign of God's favor. He cites Jesus' statement in Mark 10:25 that "It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God" (KJV) as evidence to oppose such thinking.[85] 
 Other critics of the movement assail promises made by its leaders, arguing that the broad freedom from problems they promise is irresponsible.[39] Televangelists are often criticized for abusing the faith of their listeners by enriching themselves through large donations.[86] Prosperity theology has been opposed for not adequately explaining the poverty of the Apostles. For instance, some theologians believe that the life and writings of Paul the Apostle, who is believed to have experienced significant suffering during his ministry, are particularly in conflict with prosperity theology.[87] Cathleen Falsani, religion writer in an opinion piece in The Washington Post, points to the conflict with basic Christian teachings "Jesus was born poor, and he died poor. During his earthly tenure, he spoke time and again about the importance of spiritual wealth and health. When he talked about material wealth, it was usually part of a cautionary tale."[88] 
 In their book Health, Wealth and Happiness, theologians David Jones and Russell Woodbridge characterize the doctrine as poor theology.[89] They suggest that righteousness cannot be earned and that the Bible does not promise an easy life.[90] They argue that it is inconsistent with the gospel of Jesus and propose that the central message of the gospel should be Jesus' life, death, and resurrection.[90] Jones and Woodbridge see Jesus' importance as vital, criticizing the prosperity gospel for marginalizing him in favor of a focus on human need.[91] In another article, Jones criticizes the prosperity theology interpretation of the Abrahamic covenant, God's promise to bless Abraham's descendants, arguing that this blessing is spiritual and should already apply to all Christians. He also argues that the proponents of the doctrine misconstrue the atonement, criticizing their teaching that Jesus' death took away poverty as well as sin. He believes that this teaching is drawn from a misunderstanding of Jesus' life and criticizes John Avanzini's teaching that Jesus was wealthy as a misrepresentation,[92] noting that Paul often taught Christians to give up their material possessions. Although he accepts giving as "praiseworthy",[92] he questions the motives of prosperity theology and criticizes the "Law of Compensation",[92] which teaches that when Christians give generously, God will give back more in return. Rather, Jones cites Jesus' teaching to "give, hoping for nothing in return".[92] Jones and Woodbridge also note that Jesus instructed followers to focus on spiritual rewards, citing his command in Matthew 6:19–20 "Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth ... But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven" (KJV).[93] Jones criticizes the doctrine's view of faith: he does not believe that it should be used as a spiritual force for material gain but seen as selfless acceptance of God.[92] 
 In 1980, the General Council of the Assemblies of God criticized the doctrine of positive confession,[94] noting examples of negative confessions in the Bible (where Biblical figures express fears and doubts) that had positive results and contrasting these examples with the focus on positive confessions taught by prosperity theology. The Council argues that the biblical Greek word often translated as "confess" literally translates as "to speak the same thing", and refers to both positive and negative confessions.[95] The statement also criticizes the doctrine for failing to recognize the will of God: God's will should have precedence over the will of man,[96] including their desires for wealth, and Christians should "recognize the sovereignty of God".[94] The statement further criticizes prosperity theology for overlooking the importance of prayer, arguing that prayer should be used for all requests, not simply positive confession.[97] The Council noted that Christians should expect suffering in this life.[94] They urge readers to apply practical tests to positive confession, arguing that the doctrine appeals to those who are already in affluent societies but that many Christians in other societies are impoverished or imprisoned.[98] Finally, the paper criticizes the distinction made by advocates of prosperity theology in the two Greek words that mean "speaking", arguing that the distinction is false and that they are used interchangeably in the Greek text.[98][F] The Council accused prosperity theology of taking passages out of context to fulfill its own needs, with the result that doctrine of positive confession is contradictory to the holistic message of the Bible.[99] 
 In April 2015, LDS apostle Dallin H. Oaks stated that people who believe in "the theology of prosperity" are deceived by riches. He continued by saying that the "possession of wealth or significant income is not a mark of heavenly favor, and their absence is not evidence of heavenly disfavor". He also cited how Jesus differentiated the attitudes towards money held by the young rich man in Mark 10:17–24, the good Samaritan, and Judas Iscariot in his betrayal. Oaks concluded this portion of his sermon by highlighting that the "root of all evil is not money but the love of money".[100] In comparison to most other Protestant denominations, Mormonism has an established tradition of entrepreneurship and less ambivalence about the pursuit of wealth.[101] A Harper's Magazine report on the relationship between the finances of the LDS Church and those of the Republican Party compared LDS beliefs and practices to the prosperity gospel.[101] 
 In 2015, well known pastor and prosperity gospel advocate Creflo Dollar launched a fundraising campaign to replace a previous private jet with a $65 million Gulfstream G650.[102] On the August 16, 2015 episode of his HBO weekly series Last Week Tonight, John Oliver satirized prosperity theology by announcing that he had established his own tax-exempt church, called Our Lady of Perpetual Exemption. In a lengthy segment, Oliver focused on what he characterized as the predatory conduct of televangelists who appeal for repeated gifts from people in financial distress or personal crises, and he criticized the very loose requirements for entities to obtain tax exempt status as churches under U.S. tax law. Oliver said that he would ultimately donate any money collected by the church to Doctors Without Borders.[103] 
 In July 2018, Antonio Spadaro and Marcelo Figueroa, in the Jesuit journal La Civiltà Cattolica, examined the origins of the prosperity gospel in the United States and described it as a reductive version of the American Dream which had offered opportunities of success and prosperity unreachable in the Old World. The authors distinguished the prosperity gospel from Max Weber's Protestant ethic, noting that the Protestant ethic related prosperity to religiously inspired austerity while the prosperity gospel saw prosperity as the simple result of personal faith. They criticized many aspects of the prosperity gospel, noting particularly the tendency of believers to lack compassion for the poor, since their poverty was seen as a sign that they had not followed the rules and therefore are not loved by God.[104][105] 
 In 2019, the documentary American Gospel: Christ Alone presented a number of critical analyses of the prosperity gospel while following the stories of individuals whose lives had intersected with prosperity teachings, including Costi Hinn, nephew of Benny Hinn.[106] 
 The reality television series Preachers of L.A. follows the lives of pastors who adhere to prosperity theology. In a review, Cathleen Falsani described it as imitating other reality series with "McMansions, bling, hair extensions, luxury cars, pontificating, preening and epic delusions of grandeur".[107] 
 Roberts, Oral; Montgomery, G. H. (1966). God's Formula for Success and Prosperity. Tulsa: Abundant Life Publication. OCLC 4654539. 
 Ziglar, Zig (2006). Better Than Good: Creating a Life You Can't Wait to Live. Nashville: Thomas Nelson Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7852-8919-7. 
 Ziglar, Zig; Ziglar, Tom (2012). Born to Win: Find Your Success Code. Dallas: SUCCESS Media. ISBN 9780983156512. 
 Pejorative nicknames have been attached to the theology, including "name it and claim it" and "blab it and grab it".[109] 
 The theme of Abundant life sometimes is used by leaders associated with the Word of Faith movement to refer to the experience of congregants who corporately experience the results of faith.[110] 
 Osteen's teachings are often described as a moderate form of prosperity theology.[9] 
 The Council notes that the words Rhema and Logos are used interchangeably in the New Testament, and a Hebrew word is rendered into both words in different passages of the Septuagint.[113] 
 ^ Coleman 2000, p. 28: "[...] the association of the self and spiritual practices with mechanical processes is a common feature of believers' discourse." 
 ^ McNeill 1954, p. 222: "The now popular notion that Calvin held the prosperity of believers to be proof of their election is a perversion of Weber and an inversion of Calvin." 
 Brown, Candy Gunther (2011). Global Pentecostal and Charismatic Healing. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-539341-5. 
 Clifton, Shane (2009). Pentecostal Churches in Transition: Analysing the Developing Ecclesiology of the Assemblies of God in Australia. Global Pentecostal and Charismatic Studies. 3. Brill Academic Publishers. ISBN 978-90-04-17526-6. 
 Cohen, Benyamin (2009). My Jesus Year: A Rabbi's Son Wanders the Bible Belt in Search of His Own Faith. HarperOne. ISBN 978-0-061-24518-3. 
 Hwa, Yung (1997). Mangoes or bananas?: the Quest for an Authentic Asian Christian Theology. Regnum International. ISBN 978-1-870345-25-5. 
 Jenkins, Philip (2011). The Next Christendom: The Coming of Global Christianity. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-976746-5. 
 Jones, David; Woodbridge, Russell (2011). Health, Wealth & Happiness: Has the Prosperity Gospel Overshadowed the Gospel of Christ?. Kregel Publications. ISBN 978-0-8254-2930-9. 
 Maddox, Marion (2012). Farhadian, Charles E. (ed.). Introducing World Christianity. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-4051-8248-5. 
 Robbins, Joel (2010). Allan Anderson (ed.). Studying Global Pentecostalism: Theories and Methods. Michael Bergunder, André Droogers, and Cornelis van der Laan. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-26662-9. 
 Walton, Jonathan L. (2009). Watch This! The Ethics and Aesthetics of Black Televangelism. NYU Press. ISBN 978-0-8147-9417-3. 
 Wiegele, Katharine L. (2005). Investing in Miracles: El Shaddai and the Transformation of Popular Catholicism in the Philippines. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-2861-5. 
 Fortner, Michael D. (2011). The Prosperity Gospel Exposed; and Other False Doctrine. ISBN 978-1463737986. 

 id="file23242641" filename="quinceanera" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.usccb.org/prayer-and-worship/sacraments-and-sacramentals/sacramentals-blessings/persons/quinceanera">
 Order for the Blessing on the Fifteenth Birthday (Quinceañera) 
 Among several Spanish-speaking countries and among many Hispanics in the United States there is the custom of celebrating the passage from childhood to adolescence with a ritual that expresses thanksgiving to God for the gift of life and that asks for a blessing from God for the years ahead. This celebration may take place within Mass or outside of Mass. Commonly asked questions about the Blessing on the Fifteenth Birthday (Quinceañera) are answered here. 
 1. What is a quinceañera? 
 The quinceañera is a traditional celebration of life and gratitude to God on the occasion of the fifteenth birthday of a young Hispanic woman. The ritual emphasizes her passage from childhood to adulthood. The family usually requests a Mass or a blessing to be held in the Church. The rite is frequently celebrated in several countries in the Americas, including Mexico, Central and South America and the Caribbean. It is frequently requested by Hispanic Catholics in the dioceses of the United States of America. 
 2. What is the origin of the quinceañera? 
 The tribes of Meso-America, possibly the Mayas and Toltecs, celebrated elaborate rites of passage for their young men and women. Rites of passage are known to have existed in the Iberian Peninsula as well. The Spanish conquistadores may have brought the practice to Meso-America. It is possible that the missionaries would have approved of this practice, since these rites closely paralleled Christian practices of initiation and marriage. The ancient Mozarabic Rite of the Iberian peninsula had elaborate rituals marking the passage of baptized adolescents, each of which included specific references to Christian initiation and each of which was celebrated following the reception of Holy Communion at Mass. With the suppression of the Mozarabic Rite, many of these rituals passed into popular religious practice. 
 3. How is the quinceañera celebrated? 
 In the presence of family and friends, the young woman (the quinceañera), often accompanied by fifteen young men and women of her choice (damas y chambelanes), enters the Church in procession, together with her parents and godparents. If she has prepared the readings, she may serve as the lector for at least one of the readings. After the Liturgy of the Word, the quinceañera makes a commitment to God and the Blessed Virgin to live out the rest of her life according to the teachings of Christ and the Church by renewing her Baptismal promises. Then, signs of faith (medal, Bible, rosary, prayer book) which have been blessed and may be given to her. A special blessing of the quinceañera concludes the Liturgy of the Eucharist. After Mass, the young woman is presented to the community. The ritual continues with a dinner and sometimes a dance in her honor. 
 4. Who are the participants in the celebration? 
 The quinceañera and fifteen young men and women of her choice are joined by members of her family and friends for the celebration. The priest(s) or deacon has a key role as the one who represents the Church and who prays the blessing over the young woman. The local community is also encouraged to gather for the celebration. 
 5. May the quinceañera take place outside Mass? 
 The ritual may be celebrated simply, outside Mass with the young woman, accompanied by her parents and godparents, coming before the priest or deacon to receive a special blessing in the Church. Or, there may be a more elaborate celebration with elegant clothes, flowers, music and decorations and with more than one priest presiding. 
 6. Why would this blessing be included in the Book of Blessings? 
 The Book of Blessings (De Benedictionibus) provides blessings for persons, places, and objects in a wide variety of circumstances and occasions. The Order of Blessing on the Fifteenth Birthday is already published as a small fascicle, and in a future revision of the Book of Blessings, the blessing will be included within Part I: Blessings Directly Pertaining to Persons, alongside orders for the blessing of a family, a married couple, children, sons and daughters, etc. 
 7. Why is it necessary to have an approved order of blessing for this practice? 
 The traditional blessing, part of the popular religion of Latinos and common in some countries of Central and South America and the Caribbean, has developed in the United States into an unofficial “liturgical rite  and is regulated in some dioceses with specific guidelines and norms. 
 There had been no approved Blessing for the Quinceañera and unapproved “rituals  of a variety of origins were in widespread use a number of U.S. dioceses. In the absence of a confirmed rite, celebrants often spontaneously created prayers and ritual actions. Since only approved and confirmed rites may be used in the Liturgy, an Order for the Blessing on the Fifteenth Birthday was approved by the full body of U.S. Bishops and received the recognitio from the Vatican Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments. This is the Quinceañera ritual approved for use in the dioceses of the United States of America in 2007. 
 8. Why do parents present their daughter for this celebration? 
 The parents, in coming to the parish Church seeking the blessing, acknowledge that their daughter has reached the age where she is capable of handling additional responsibility. They see the quince años Mass as a way to thank God for the blessing of their daughter’s life and to seek God’s blessing and guidance as she enters adulthood. The extended family, (grandparents, godparents, aunts, uncles and cousins) is usually present, to celebrate with the quinceañera. Esponsores, other couples acting as sponsors, may bring forward the blessed religious articles which are presented to the quinceañera. 
 9. What is the positive value of this celebration for the parish? 
 The Virgin Mary is a model for women of every class and age group. In a culture where machismo is still evident, the choice by a young Hispanic woman to celebrate her fifteenth birthday in the Church offers a host of possibilities for her and the parish. If the young women are received with understanding and a willingness to meet their needs, the celebration of the quinceañera can be a “teachable moment  for the parish. 
 10. Could a parish institute a period of preparation for the quinceañera? 
 The quinceañera, and the fifteen teens who form part of her celebration, could be asked to participate in a day of retreat or in one or several sessions of preparation with talks, activities and prayer, together with the celebration of the Sacrament of Penance, prior to the date of the celebration. The focus on the positive contribution of women in society as well as their becoming active participants in the life of the parish can also be emphasized. They may be encouraged to take a more active part in the various parish ministries. 
 11. Why is this celebration necessary when the Church has the sacrament of Confirmation? 
 The Sacrament of Confirmation is one of the three sacraments of initiation by which the baptized "are more perfectly bound to the Church… and the Holy Spirit endows them with special strength so that they are more strictly obliged to spread and defend the faith, both by word and by deed, as true witnesses of Christ."1 The celebration of the quince años complements the Sacrament by providing a special blessing for a young Catholic woman as she enters adulthood, preparing her for her new responsibilities. 
 Today’s teenagers live in a culture which urges them to embrace "the facile myths of success and power,"2 in direct contrast to the Catholic values espoused by their parents. At the time of the celebration of the blessing of the quinceañera, a young woman comes to the Church seeking a blessing. Standing before the altar, she is publicly presented by her family and friends in a gesture of thanksgiving. 
 12. Does this celebration sometimes become too costly and extravagant? 
 Yes. Unfortunately, the advantage of living in a country where material things are readily available often encourages families to give into a competitive consumerism and spend exorbitant sums on such celebrations. The same tendency is often seen in the planning of celebrations of the Sacrament of Marriage. 
 However, as with weddings, many Hispanic families save for years to provide the celebration for their daughter, granddaughter, goddaughter or niece. While to an uninformed observer, the financial expenditure may appear far beyond the means of the family, the reality may be very different. The custom of having padrinos/madrinas and esponsores makes it possible for there to be a larger array of donated gifts and services. Family members who are seamstresses, musicians, drivers of limousines, florist shop workers, cooks, bakers and photographers often donate their services as gifts. The church decorations, food and music for the fiesta, are often provided by family and friends. 
 Parishes may also give pastoral guidance in having the celebration for several girls at one Mass, thus focusing more on the liturgy than on any one family, or offering the use of the parish hall for the fiesta which follows. A parish, a parish organization or several parish organizations could sponsor a fiesta following a monthly religious celebration for all the quinceañeras of the parish. It is suggested that a time of preparation be set before the date of the celebration so that all participants understand the meaning of the religious celebration and have an opportunity to ready themselves spiritually. 
 13. How can this celebration be a means of strengthening the faith of Latino youth? 
 Adults have a responsibility to pass on the faith to younger members of the community. The celebration of quince años is a crucial time in the life of a young Hispanic woman. While society invites youth to gang membership, drug and alcohol abuse and irresponsible sexual behavior, the Church can offer the quinceañera an opportunity to reflect on her role as a Catholic Christian woman in a society which often distorts the woman’s role. 
 The U.S. Bishops’ pastoral letter, Renewing the Vision: A Framework for Catholic Youth Ministry is a call to personal discipleship, evangelization and leadership of youth so strong that the bishops ask the entire Church to make ministry with adolescents its concern as well. The letter focuses on three goals: empowering young people to live as disciples of Christ in today’s world; drawing young people to responsible participation in the life, mission and work of the faith community; and fostering the personal and spiritual growth of each young person. 
 The quinceañera ritual is valuable for the religious message it sends not only to young people, but also to parents, grandparents, godparents and the entire parish in calling them to prayerfully join with youth in making a commitment to God and the Church. 
 14. Why is the rite just for girls? 
 According to traditional usage, the Bendición de la Quinceañera has been a celebration for young Hispanic women. This is the practice in the countries of origin of the young women requesting the blessing. Recently, in the Western and Southwestern parts of the United States a limited number of young Hispanic males have requested this blessing for themselves or, in one case, twins (male and female), requested a joint celebration. There is no basis in the traditional usage, however, for the inclusion of young men in the rite. 
 The celebration also can be a strengthening of the identity of the quinceañera within her family and as a Catholic, as well as an affirmation of the gift of women as a blessing to the Church. In the Hispanic community, traditionally it has been the women who hand on the faith. The abuelita (grandmother) holds a special place in the family for that reason. Women organize feast days, celebrate rituals and offer prayers. The mother sets up the altarcito in the home where prayers are offered for the living and the dead. She makes the home a domestic church. Hispanic women are the evangelizers and teachers of values, yet their leadership has often gone unrecognized. The Quince Años Blessing publicly acknowledges this historic role. 
 15. Why is the Order for the Blessing on the Fifteenth Birthday presented in English and in Spanish? 
 In many parishes the young women who come to the church asking for the Bendición de la Quinceañera speak only Spanish, others are bilingual, and some of those who were born in this country speak only English. Those participating in the celebration, the parents, godparents, relatives and friends, also share in this linguistic diversity. Many young women who choose the Eucharistic celebration in English and who pray in this language, nevertheless desire to participate in the traditional custom of the Quinceañera and prefer that at least some of the celebration be done in English. 
 Footnotes 
 Lumen Gentium, no. 11; Cf. Rite of Confirmation, no. 2. 
 Saint John Paul II, Message for the 2005 World Youth Day (August 6, 2004), no. 5. 

 id="file23242693" filename="RDCA.pdf" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.liturgyoffice.org.uk/Resources/Rites/RDCA.pdf">
Dedication of a Church
and an Altar
Introductions
Contents
Decree

2

Laying of a Foundation Stone or
Commencement of Work
on the Building of a Church

3

Chapter Two

Dedication of a Church

5

Chapter Three

Dedication of a Church Already in General Use
for Sacred Celebrations
13

Chapter Four

Dedication of an Altar

15

Chapter Five

Blessing of a Church

23

Chapter Six

Blessing of an Altar

25

Chapter Seven

Blessing of a Chalice and Paten

27

Chapter One

L i t u r g y Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar English translation © 1978, International
O f f i c e Committee on English in the Liturgy, Inc. (ICEL) All rights reserved.
ENGLAND
& W A L E S One of a series of resources from www.liturgyoffice.org.uk/Documents
Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions   

Sacred Congregation for the Sacraments
and Divine Worship
Prot. no. CD 300/77

Decree

The rite for the dedication of a church and an altar is rightly considered among the most
solemn liturgical services. A church is the place where the Christian community is gathered to hear the word of God, to offer intercession and praise to him, and above all to
celebrate the holy mysteries, and it is the place where the holy sacrament of the eucharist
is kept.Thus it stands as a special kind of image of the Church itself, which is God’s temple
built from living stones. And the altar of a church, around which the holy people of God
gather to take part in the Lord’s sacrifice and to be refreshed at the heavenly meal, stands as
a sign of Christ himself, who is the priest, the victim, and the altar of his own sacrifice.
These rites, found in the second book of the Roman Pontifical, were revised and simplified in 1961. Nevertheless it was judged necessary to revise the rites again and to adapt
them to contemporary conditions in view of the purpose and the norms of the liturgical
reform that Vatican II set in motion and fostered.
Pope Paul VI by his authority has approved the new Ordo dedicationis ecclesiae et altaris prepared by the Congregation for the Sacraments and Divine Worship. He has ordered it to
be published and prescribed that it replace the rites now in the second book of the Roman
Pontifical.
This Congregation, by mandate of the Pope, therefore publishes this Ordo dedicationis ecclesiae et altaris. In the Latin text it will be in effect as soon as it appears; in the vernacular, it
will take effect, after the translations have been confirmed and approved by the Apostolic
See, on the day determined by the conferences of bishops.
Anything to the contrary notwithstanding.
From the office of the Congregation for the Sacraments and Divine Worship, May 29,
1977, Pentecost.
+
+

James R. Cardinal Knox
Prefect
Antonio Innocenti
Titular Archbishop of Eclano
Secretary

   Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions

Chapter One
Rite of Laying the Foundation Stone
Work on the Building of a Church

or

Beginning

Introduction
1.

When the building of a new church begins, it is desirable to celebrate a rite to ask God’s
blessing for the success of the work and to remind the people that the structure built of
stone will be a visible sign of the living Church, God’s building that is formed of the people themselves.
In accordance with liturgical tradition, this rite consists of the blessing of the site of the
new church and the blessing and laying of the foundation stone. When there is to be no
foundation stone because of the particular architecture of the building, the rite of the
blessing of the site of the new church should still be celebrated in order to dedicate the
beginning of the work of God.

2.

The rite for the laying of a foundation stone or for beginning a new church may be celebrated on any day except during the Easter triduum. But the preference should be for a
day when the people can be present in large numbers.

3.

The bishop of the diocese is rightly the one to celebrate the rite. If he cannot do so himself, he shall entrust the function to another bishop or a priest, especially to one who is his
associate and assistant in the pastoral care of the diocese or of the community for which
the new church is to be built.

4.

Notice of the date and hour of the celebration should be given to the people in good time.
The pastor or others concerned should instruct them in the meaning of the rite and the
reverence to be shown toward the church that is to be built for them.
It is also desirable that the people be asked to give their generous and willing support in
the building of the church.

5.

Insofar as possible, the area for the erection of the church should be marked out clearly. It
should be possible to walk about without difficulty.

6.

In the place where the altar will be located, a wooden cross of suitable height is fixed in
the ground.

7.

For the celebration of the rite the following should be prepared:
– The Roman Pontifical and Lectionary;
– chair for the bishop;
– depending on the circumstances, the foundation stone, which by tradition is a rectangular cornerstone, together with cement and the tools for setting the stone in
the foundation;
– container of holy water with sprinkler;
– censer, incense boat and spoon;
– processional cross and torches for the servers.


See 1 Cor 3:9; LG, 6.

Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions   

Sound equipment should be set up so that the assembly can clearly hear the readings,
prayers, and instructions.
8.

For the celebration of the rite the vestments are white or of some festive color. The following should be prepared:
–
–
–
–

for the bishop: aIb, stole, cope, miter, and pastoral staff;
for the priest, when one presides over the celebration: alb, stole, and cope;
for the deacons: aIbs, stoles, and if opportune, dalmatics;
for other ministers: albs or other lawfully approved dress.

Outline of the Rite
Approach to the Construction Site
A. First Form: Procession
Greeting
Brief Introduction
Prayer
Procession
B. Second Form: Station at the Construction Site of the New Church
Acclamation or Song
Greeting
Brief Instruction
Prayer

Reading of the Word of God
Reading(s)
[Responsorial Psalm]
Homily
Placing of the Document(s) in the Foundation Stone

Blessing of the Site of the New Church
Prayer of Blessing
Laying of the Foundation Stone

Concluding Rite
General Intercessions
Lord’s Prayer
Concluding Prayer
Blessing and Dismissal

   Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions

Chapter Two
Dedication

of a

Church

Introduction
I. Nature and Dignity of Churches
1.

Through his death and resurrection, Christ became the true and perfect temple of the
New Covenant and gathered together a people to be his own.
This holy people, made one as the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are one, is the Church
that is, the temple of God built of living stones, where the Father is worshiped in spirit
and in truth.
Rightly, then, from early times ‘church’ has also been the name given to the building in
which the Christian community gathers to hear the word of God, to pray together, to
receive the sacraments, and to celebrate the eucharist.

2.

Because the church is a visible building, it stands as a special sign of the pilgrim Church
on earth and reflects the Church dwelling in heaven.
When a church is erected as a building destined solely and permanently for assembling
the people of God and for carrying out sacred functions, it is fitting that it be dedicated to
God with a solemn rite, in accordance with the ancient custom of the Church.

3.

The very nature of a church demands that it be suited to sacred celebrations, dignified,
evincing a noble beauty, not mere costly display, and it should stand as a sign and symbol of
heavenly realities. ‘The general plan of the sacred edifice should be such that in some way
it conveys the image of the gathered assembly. It should also allow the participants to take
the place most appropriate to them and assist all to carry out their individual functions
properly.’ Moreover, in what concerns the sanctuary, the altar, the chair, the lectern, and the
place for the reservation of the blessed sacrament, the norms of the General Instruction of
the Roman Missal are to be followed.
Also, the norms must be observed that concern things and places destined for the celebration of other sacraments, especially baptism and penance.

II.Titular of a Church and the Relics of the Saints to be Placed in it
4.

Every church to be dedicated must a have a titular. This may be: the Blessed Trinity; our
Lord Jesus Christ invoked according to a mystery of his life or a title already accepted in
the liturgy; the Holy Spirit; the Blessed Virgin Mary, likewise invoked according to some
appellation already accepted in the liturgy; one of the angels; or, finally, a saint inscribed in
the Roman Martyrology or in a duly approved Appendix. A blessed may not be the titular
without an indult of the Apostolic See. A church should have one titular only, unless it is
a question of saints who are listed together in the Calendar.






See Jn 2:21.
See Cyprian, De oratione dominica 23: PL 4, 553; LG, no. 4: AAS 57 (1965) 7; ConstDecrDel 96.
See Jn 4:23.
See GIRM, nos. 253, 257, 258, 259–267, 271, 272, 276–277. See also Roman Ritual Holy Communion
and Worship of the Eucharist outside Mass, nos. 6 and 9–11.
See Rite of Baptism for Children, no. 25; Rite of Penance, no. 12.

Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions   

5.

The tradition in the Roman liturgy of placing relics of martyrs or other saints beneath the
altar should be preserved, if possible. But the following should be noted:
a)

b)

c)

Such relics should be of a size sufficient for them to be recognized as parts of human bodies. Hence excessively small relics of one or more saints must not be placed
beneath the altar.
The greatest care must be taken to determine whether the relics in question are authentic. It is better for an altar to be dedicated without relics than to have relics of
doubtful authenticity placed beneath it.
A reliquary must not be placed upon the altar or set into the table of the altar; it must
be placed beneath the table of the altar, as the design of the altar permits.

III. Celebration of the Dedication
Minister of the Rite
6.
Since the bishop has been entrusted with the care of the particular Church, it is his responsibility to dedicate to God new churches built in his diocese.
If he cannot himself preside at the rite, he shall entrust this function to another bishop,
especially to one who is his associate and assistant in the pastoral care of the community
for which the church has been built or, in altogether special circumstances, to a priest, to
whom he shall give a special mandate.
Choice of Day
7
A day should be chosen for the dedication of the new church when the people can be
present in large numbers, especially a Sunday. Since the theme of the dedication pervades
this entire rite, the dedication of a new church may not take place on days on which it
is altogether improper to disregard the mystery then being commemorated: the Easter
triduum, Christmas, Epiphany, Ascension, Pentecost, Ash Wednesday, the weekdays of Holy
Week, and All Souls.
Mass of the Dedication
8.
The celebration of the eucharist is inseparably bound up with the rite of the dedication of
a church; when a church is dedicated therefore the liturgical texts of the day are omitted
and texts proper to the rite are used for both the liturgy of the word and the liturgy of the
eucharist.
9.

It is fitting that the bishop concelebrate the Mass with the priests who take part with him
in the rite of dedication and those who have been given charge over the parish or the
community for which the church has been built.

Office of the Dedication
10. The day on which a church is dedicated is kept as a solemnity in that church.
The office of the dedication of a church is celebrated, beginning with Evening Prayer I.
When the rite of depositing relics takes place, it is highly recommended to keep a vigil
at the relics of the martyr or saint that are to be placed beneath the altar; the best way of
doing this is to have the office of readings, taken from the respective common or proper.
This vigil should be properly adapted to encourage the people’s participation, but the requirements of the law are respected.



See GIRM, no. 266.
See GILH. nos. 70-73.

   Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions

Parts of the Rite
A. Entrance into the Church
11. The rite of the dedication begins with the entrance into the church; this may take place
in one of the three following ways; the one best suited to the circumstances of time and
place is to be used.
– Procession to the church to be dedicated: all assemble in a nearby church or other
suitable place, from which the bishop, the ministers, and the congregation proceed
to the church to be dedicated, praying and singing.
– Solemn entrance: if the procession cannot take place or seems inopportune, the
community gathers at the entrance of the church.
– Simple entrance: the congregation assembles in the church itself; the bishop, the
concelebrants, and the ministers enter from the sacristy in the usual way.
Two rituals are most significant in the entrance into a new church:
a)
b)

the handing over of the church: representatives of those who have been involved in
the building of the church hand it over to the bishop.
The sprinkling of the church: the bishop blesses water and with it sprinkles the people, who are the spiritual temple, then the walls of the church, and finally, the altar.

B. Liturgy of the Word
12. Three readings are used in the liturgy of the word. The texts are chosen from those in the
Lectionary (nos. 704 and 706) for the rite of the dedication of a church.
The first reading is always, even during the Easter season, the passage of Nehemiah that
tells of the people of Jerusalem gathered in the presence of the scribe Ezra to hear the
proclamation of the law of God (Neh 8:1-4a, 5-6, 8-10).
13.

After the readings the bishop gives the homily, in which he explains the biblical readings
and the meaning of the dedication of a church.
The profession of faith is always said. The general intercessions are omitted, since the
Litany of the Saints is sung in their place.

C. Prayer of Dedication and the Anointing of the Church and the Altar
14.

15.



Depositing of the Relics of the Saints
If it is to take place, the relics of a martyr are deposited after the singing of the Litany of
the Saints, to signify that the sacrifice of the members has its source in the sacrifice of the
Head. When relics of a martyr are not available, relics of another saint may be deposited
in the altar.
Prayer of Dedication
The celebration of the eucharist is the most important and the one necessary rite for the
dedication of a church.

See RM, Common of Martyrs 8, prayer over the gifts. Ambose, Epistula, 22:13: PL 16, 1023: ‘Let the
triumphant victims rest in the place where Christ is victim: he, however, who suffered for all, upon the
altar; they, who have been redeemed by his sufferings, beneath the altar.’ See Ps. Maximus of Turin, Sermo
78: PL 57, 689–690. Rv 6:9 ‘I saw underneath the altar the souls of all people who had been killed on
account of the word of God, for witnessing to it.’

Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions   

Nevertheless, in accordance with the tradition of the Church in both East and West, a
special prayer of dedication is also said.This prayer is a sign of the intention to dedicate the
church to the Lord for all times and a petition for his blessing.
16.

Rites of Anointing, Incensing, Covering, and Lighting the Altar
The rites of anointing, incensing, covering, and lighting the altar express in visible signs
several aspects of the invisible work that the Lord accomplishes through the Church in its
celebration of the divine mysteries, especially the eucharist.
Anointing of the altar and the walls of the church:
– The anointing with chrism makes the altar a symbol of Christ, who, before all others, is and is called ‘The Anointed One ’; for the Father anointed him with the Holy
Spirit and constituted him the High Priest so that on the altar of his body he might
offer the sacrifice of his life for the salvation of all.
– The anointing of the church signifies that it is given over entirely and perpetually to
Christian worship. In keeping with liturgical tradition, there are twelve anointings,
or, where it is more convenient, four, as a symbol that the church is an image of the
holy city of Jerusalem.
b) Incense is burned on the altar to signify that Christ’s sacrifice, there perpetuated in
mystery, ascends to God as an odor of sweetness and also to signify that the people’s
prayers rise up pleasing and acceptable, reaching the throne of God.
The incensation of the nave of the church indicates that the dedication makes it a
house of prayer, but the people of God are incensed first, because they are the living
temple in which each fanciful member is a spiritual altar.10
c) The covering of the altar indicates that the Christian altar is the altar of the eucharistic
sacrifice and the table of the Lord; around it priests and people, by one and the same
rite but with a difference of function, celebrate the memorial of Christ’s death and
resurrection and partake of his supper. For this reason the altar is prepared as the table of the sacrificial banquet and adorned as for a feast. Thus the dressing of the altar
clearly signifies that it is the Lord’s table at which all God’s people joyously meet to
be refreshed with divine food, namely, the body and blood of Christ sacrificed.
d) The lighting of the altar, which is followed by the lighting of the church, reminds
us that Christ is ‘a light to enlighten the nations’;11 his brightness shines out in the
Church and through it in the whole human family.
a)

D. Celebration of the Eucharist
17. After the altar had been prepared, the bishop celebrates the eucharist, the principal and
the most ancient part of the whole rite,12 because the celebration of the eucharist is in the
closest harmony with the rite of the dedication of a church:
For the celebration of the eucharistic sacrifice achieves the end for which the church was
built and the altar erected and expresses this end by particularly clear signs.
Furthermore, the eucharist, which sanctifies the hearts of those who receive it, in a sense
consecrates the altar and the place of celebration, as the ancient Fathers of the Church

10
11
12

See Rev 8:3-4.
See Rom 12:1.
Lk 2:32.
See Pope Vigilius, Epistula ad Profuturum episcopum 4: PL 84, 832.

   Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions

often assert: ‘This altar should be an object of awe: by nature it is stone, but it is made holy
when it receives the body of Christ.’13
Finally, the bond closely connecting the dedication of a church with the celebration of
the eucharist is likewise evident from the fact that the Mass for the dedication has its own
preface, which is a central part of the rite itself.

IV. Adaptation of the Rite
Adaptations within the Competence of the Conferences of Bishops
18. The conferences of bishops may adapt this rite, as required, to the character of each region,
but in such a way that nothing of its dignity and solemnity is lost.
However, the following are to be respected:
a)

The celebration of Mass with the proper preface and prayer for a dedication must
never be omitted.
b) Rites that have a special meaning and force from liturgical tradition (see no. 16) must
be retained, unless weighty reasons stand in the way, but the wording may be suitably
adapted if necessary.
With regard to adaptations, the competent ecclesiastical authority is to consult the Holy
See and introduce adaptations with its consent.14
Adaptations within the Competence of the Ministers
19. It is for the bishop and for those in charge of the celebration of the rite:
– to decide the manner of entrance into the church (see no. 11);
– to determine the manner of handing over the new church to the bishop (no. 11);
– to decide whether to have the depositing of relics of the saints. The decisive consideration is the spiritual good of the community; the prescriptions in no. 5 must
be followed.
It is for the rector of the church to be dedicated, helped by those who assist him in the
pastoral work, to decide and prepare everything concerning the readings, singing, and
other pastoral aids to foster the fruitful participation of the people and to ensure a dignified celebration.

V. Pastoral Preparation
20.

In order that the people may take part fully in the rite of dedication, the rector of the
church to be dedicated and others experienced in the pastoral ministry are to instruct
them on the import of the celebration and its spiritual, ecclesial, and evangelizing power.
Accordingly, the people are to be instructed about the various parts of the church and
their use, the rite of dedication, and the chief liturgical symbols employed in it. Thus led
by suitable pastoral resources to a full understanding of the meaning of the dedication of
a church through its rites and prayers, they will take an active, intelligent, and devout part
in the sacred service.

VI. Requisites for the Dedication of a Church
21.
13
14

For the celebration of the rite the following should be prepared:
John Chrysostom, Homilia 20 in 2 Cor 3: PG 61, 540.
See SC, art. 40.

Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions   

22.

23.

24.

a) In the place of assembly:
– The Roman Pontifical;
– processional cross;
– if relics of the saints are to be carried in procession, the items in no. 24a.
b) In the sacristy or in the sanctuary or in the body of the church to be dedicated, as each situation
requires:
– The Roman Missal;
– The Lectionarv;
– container of water to be blessed and sprinkler;
– container with the chrism;
– towels for wiping the table of the altar;
– if needed, a waxed linen cloth or waterproof covering of the same size as the altar;
– basin and jug of water, towels, and all that is needed for washing the bishop’s hands
and those of the priests after they have anointed the walls of the church;
– linen gremial;
– brazier for burning incense or aromatic spices; or grains of incense and small candles
to burn on the altar;
– censer, incense boat and spoon;
– chalice, corporal, purificators, and hand towel;
– bread, wine, and water for the celebration of Mass;
– altar cross, unless there is already a cross in the sanctuary or the cross that is carried
in the entrance procession is to be placed near the altar;
– altar cloth, candles, and candlesticks;
– flowers, if opportune.
It is praiseworthy to keep the ancient custom of hanging on the walls of the church crosses
made of stone, brass, or other suitable material or of having the crosses carved on the walls.
Thus twelve or four crosses should be provided, depending on the number of anointings
(see no. 16), and fixed here and there at a suitable height on the walls of the church. Beneath each cross a small bracket should be fitted and in it a small candlestick is placed, with
a candle to be lighted.
For the Mass of the dedication the vestments are white or of some festive color. The following should be prepared:
– for the bishop: alb, stole, chasuble, mitre, pastoral staff, and pallium, if the bishop has
the right to wear one;
– for the concelebrating priests: the vestments for concelebrating Mass;
– for the deacons: albs, stoles, and dalmatics;
– for other ministers: albs or other lawfully approved dress.
If relics of the saints are to be placed beneath the altar, the following should be prepared:
a) In the place of assembly:
– reliquary containing the relics, placed between flowers and lights. When the simple
entrance is used, the reliquary may be placed in a suitable part of the sanctuary before the rite begins;

10   Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions

– for the deacons who will carry the relics to be deposited: albs, red stoles, if the relics
are those of a martyr, or white in other cases, and, if available, dalmatics. If the relics
are carried by priests, then in place of dalmatics chasubles should be prepared.
The relics may also be carried by other ministers, vested in albs or other lawfully approved
dress.

25.

b) In the sanctuary:
– a small table on which the reliquary is placed during the first part of the dedication
rite.
c) In the sacristy:
– a sealant or cement to close the cover of the aperture. In addition, a stonemason
should be on hand to close the depository of the relics at the proper time.
The record of the dedication of the church should be drawn up in duplicate, signed by
the bishop, the rector of the church, and representatives of the local community; one copy
is to be kept in the diocesan archives, the other in the archives of the church. Where the
depositing of relics takes place, a third copy of the record should be made, to be placed at
the proper time in the reliquary.
In this record mention should be made of the day, month, and year of the church’s dedication, the name of the bishop who celebrated the rite, also the titular of the church and,
where applicable, the names of the martyrs or saints whose relics have been deposited
beneath the altar.
Moreover, in a suitable place in the church, an inscription should be placed stating the day,
month, and year when the dedication took place, the titular of the church, and the name
of the bishop who celebrated the rite.

VII. Anniversary of the Dedication
A. Anniversary of the Dedication of the Cathedral Church
26. In order that the importance and dignity of the local Church may stand out with greater
clarity, the anniversary of the dedication of its cathedral is to be celebrated, with the rank
of a solemnity in the cathedral itself, with the rank of a feast in the other churches of the
diocese, on the date on which the dedication of the church recurs.15 If this date is always
impeded, the celebration is assigned to the nearest date open. It is desirable that in the
cathedral church on the anniversary the bishop concelebrate the eucharist with the chapter of canons or the priests’ senate and with the participation of as many of the people as
possible.
B. Anniversary of the Dedication of a Particular Church
27. The anniversary of a church’s dedication is celebrated with the rank of a solemnity.16

15
16

See GNLYC, Table of Liturgical Days, I, 4b and II, 8b.
See GNLYC, Table of Liturgical Days, I, 4b.

Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions  11

Outline of the Rite
Introductory Rites
A. First Form: Procession
Greeting
Brief Address
Procession
Handing Over the Building
Entrance into the Church

B. Second Form: Solemn Entrance
Greeting
Brief Address
Handing Over the Building
Entrance into the Church

C. Third Form: Simple Entrance
Entrance Procession
Greeting
Handing Over the Building
Blessing and Sprinkling of Water
Hymn: Gloria
Opening Prayer

Liturgy of the Word
Presentation of the Lectionary
First Reading
Responsorial Psalm
Second Reading
Gospel Acclamation
Gospel
Homily
Profession of Faith

Prayer of Dedication and the Anointings
Invitation to Prayer
Litany of the Saints
Concluding Prayer
[Depositing of the Relics]
Prayer of Dedication
Anointing of the Altar and the Walls of the Church
Incensation of the Altar and the Church
Lighting of the Altar and the Church

Liturgy of the Eucharist

Preparation of the Altar and the Gifts
Prayer over the Gifts
Eucharistic Prayer
Communion
[Inauguration of the Blessed Sacrament Chapel
Prayer after Communion
Procession to the Chapel
Incensation of the Eucharist]

Prayer after Communion

Concluding Rite
Blessing and Dismissal

12   Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions

Chapter Three
Dedication

of a

is already being

Church in which Mass
Celebrated Regularly

Introduction
1.

In order to bring out fully the symbolism and the significance of the rite, the opening of a
new church and its dedication should take place at one and the same time. For this reason,
as was said before, care should be taken that, as far as possible, Mass is not celebrated in a
new church before it is dedicated {see chapter two, nos. 8,15,17).
Nevertheless in the case of the dedication of a church where the sacred mysteries are already being celebrated regularly, the rite set out in this chapter must be used.
Moreover, a clear distinction exists in regard to these churches. In the case of those just
built the reason for a dedication is obvious. In the case of those standing for some time the
following requirements must be met for them to be dedicated:

2.

– that the altar has not already been dedicated, since it is rightly forbidden both by
custom and by liturgical law to dedicate a church without dedicating the altar, for
the dedication of the altar is the principal part of the whole rite;
– that there be something new or notably altered about the edifice, relative either to
its structure (for example, a total restoration) or its status in law (for example, the
church’s being ranked as a parish church).
All the directions given in the Introduction to chapter two apply to this rite, unless they
are clearly extraneous to the situation which this rite envisages or other directions are
given.
This rite differs chiefly from that described in chapter two on these points:
a)

b)

c)
d)

The rite of opening the doors of the church (see chapter two, no. 34 or no. 41) is
omitted, since the church is already open to the community; consequently, the entrance rite takes the form of the simple entrance (see chapter two, nos. 43-47). However, in the case of dedicating a church closed for a long time and now being opened
again for sacred celebrations, the rite of opening the doors may be carried out, since
in this case it retains its point and significance.
The rite of handing over the church to the bishop (see chapter two, no. 33 or no. 40
or no. 47), depending on the situation, is either to be followed, omitted, or adapted
in a way relevant to the condition of the church being dedicated (for example, it will
be right to retain it in dedicating a church built recently; to omit it in dedicating an
older church where nothing has been changed in the structure; to adapt it in dedicating an older church completely restored).
The rite of sprinkling the church walls with holy water (see chapter two, nos. 48-50),
purificatory by its very nature, is omitted.
All the rites belonging to the first proclamation of the word of God in a church (see
chapter two, no. 53) are omitted; thus the liturgy of the word takes place in the usual
way. A different, pertinent reading is chosen in place of Neh 8:1-4a and its responsorial psalm, Ps 19b:8-9,10,15 (see chapter two, no. 54a).
Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions  13

Outline of the Rite
Introductory Rites
Entrance into the Church
Entrance Procession
Greeting
Handing Over the Building
Blessing and Sprinkling of Water
Hymn: Gloria
Opening Prayer

Liturgy of the Word
First Reading
Responsorial Psalm
Second Reading
Gospel Acclamation
Gospel
Homily
Profession of Faith

Prayer of Dedication and the Anointings
Invitation to Prayer
Litany of the Saints
Concluding Prayer
[Depositing of the Relics]
Prayer of Dedication
Anointing of the Altar and the Walls of the Church
Incensation of the Altar and the Church
Lighting of the Altar and the Church

Liturgy of the Eucharist
Preparation of the Altar and the Gifts
Prayer over the Gifts
Eucharistic Prayer

Communion
[Inauguration of the Blessed Sacrament Chapel
Prayer after Communion
Procession to the Chapel
Incensation of the Eucharist]
Prayer after Communion

Concluding Rite
Blessing and Dismissal

14   Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions

Chapter Four
Rite

of

Dedication

of an

Altar

Introduction
I. Nature and Dignity of the Altar
1. From meditating on God’s word, the ancient Fathers of the Church did not hesitate to assert
that Christ was the victim, priest, and altar of his own sacrifice. For in the Letter to the
Hebrews Christ is presented as the High Priest who is also the living altar of the heavenly
temple; and in the Book of Revelation our Redeemer appears as the Lamb who has been
sacrificed and whose offering is taken by the holy angel to the altar in heaven.
The Christian Is Also a Spiritual Altar
2.
Since Christ, Head and Teacher, is the true altar, his members and disciples are also spiritual
altars on which the sacrifice of a holy life is offered to God. The Fathers seem to have this
in mind. St. Ignatius of Antioch asks the Romans quite plainly: ‘Grant me only this favour:
let my blood be spilled in sacrifice to God, while there is still an altar ready.’ St. Polycarp
exhorts widows to lead a life of holiness, for ‘they are God’s altar.’ Among others, St. Gregory the Great echoes these words when he says: ‘What is God’s altar if not the souls of
those who lead good lives?… Rightly, then, the heart of the just is said to be the altar of
God.’
In another image frequently used by the writers of the Church, Christians who give themselves to prayer, offer petitions to God, and present sacrifices of supplication, are the living
stones out of which the Lord Jesus builds the Church’s altar.
The Altar,Table of the Sacrifice and the Paschal Meal
3.
By instituting in the form of a sacrificial meal the memorial of the sacrifice he was about
to offer the Father on the altar of the cross, Christ made holy the table where the community would come to celebrate their Passover. Therefore the altar is the table for a sacrifice
and for a banquet. At this table the priest, representing Christ the Lord, accomplishes what
the Lord himself did and what he handed on to his disciples to do in his memory. The
Apostle clearly intimates this: ‘The blessing cup that we bless is a communion with the
blood of Christ and the bread that we break is a communion with the body of Christ.The
fact that there is only one loaf means that though there are many of us, we form a single
Body because we an have a share in this one loaf.’











See Epiphanius, Panarium 2, 1, Haeresis 55: PG 41, 979. Cyril of Alexandia, De adoratione in spiritu et veritate
9: PG 68, 647
See Heb 4:14; 13:10.
See Rev 5:6.
See RM, Order of Mass, no. 96.
Ignatius of Antioch, Ad Romanos 2:2: Funk PA 1:255.
Polycarp, Ad Philippenses 4:3: Funk PA 1:301.
Gregory the Great, Homiliarum in Ezechielem 10, 19: PL 76, 1069.
See Origen, In librum Iesu Nave, Homilia 9, 1: SC 71, 244 and 246
See 1 Cor 10:16-17.

Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions  15

The Altar, Sign of Christ
4.
The Church’s children have the power to celebrate the memorial of Christ and take their
place at the Lord’s table anywhere that circumstances might require. But it is in keeping
with the eucharistic mystery that the Christian people erect a permanent altar for the celebration of the Lord’s Supper and they have done so from the earliest times.
The Christian altar is by its very nature properly the table of sacrifice and of the paschal
banquet. It is:
– a unique altar on which the sacrifice of the cross is perpetuated in mystery throughout the ages until Christ comes;
– a table at which the Church’s children gather to give thanks to God and receive the
body and blood of Christ.
In every church, then, the altar ‘is the centre of the thanksgiving that the eucharist accomplishes’10 and around which the Church’s other rites are, in a certain manner, arrayed.11
At the altar the memorial of the Lord is celebrated and his body and blood given to the
people. Therefore the Church’s writers have seen in the altar a sign of Christ himself. This
is the basis for the saying: ‘The altar is Christ.’
The Altar as Honouring Martyrs
5.
All the dignity of the altar rests on its being the Lord’s table. Thus the martyr’s body does
not bring honour to the altar; rather the altar does honour to the martyr’s tomb. For it
is altogether proper to erect altars over the burial place of martyrs and other saints or to
deposit their relics beneath altars as a mark of respect and as a symbol of the truth that the
sacrifice of the members has its source in the sacrifice of the Head.12 Thus ‘the triumphant
victims come to their rest in the place where Christ is victim: he, however, who suffered
for an is on the altar; they who have been redeemed by his sufferings are beneath the
altar.’13 This arrangement would seem to recall in a certain manner the spiritual vision of
the Apostle John in the Book of Revelation: ‘I saw underneath the altar the souls of all the
people who have been killed on account of the word of God, for witnessing to it.’14His
meaning is that although all the saints are rightly called Christ’s witnesses, the witness of
blood has a special significance that only the relics of the martyrs beneath the altar express
in its entirety.

II. Erecting an Altar
6.

It is desirable that in every church there be a fixed altar and that in other places set apart
for sacred celebrations there be either a fixed or a movable altar.
A fixed altar is one so constructed that it is attached to the floor so that it cannot be moved;
a movable altar can be transferred from place to place.15

7.

In new churches it is better to erect only one altar so that in the one assembly of the people of God the single altar signifies the one Saviour Jesus Christ and the one eucharist of
the Church.
10
11
12
13
14
15

GIRM, no. 259.
See Pius XII, Encycl. Mediator Dei: AAS 39 (1947) 529.
See RM. Common of Martyrs 8, prayer over the gifts.
Ambrose, Epistula 22, 13: PL 16, 1023. See Ps. Maximus of Turin, Sermo 78: PL 57, 689-690.
Rev 6:9.
See GIRM, nos. 265, 261.

16   Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions

But an altar may also be erected in a chapel (somewhat separated, if possible, from the
body of the church) where the tabernacle for the reservation of the blessed sacrament is
situated. On weekdays when there is a small gathering of people Mass may be celebrated
at this altar.
The merely decorative erection of several altars in a church must be entirely avoided.
8.

The altar should be freestanding so that the priest can easily walk around it and celebrate
Mass facing the people.‘It should be so placed as to be a focal point on which the attention
of the whole congregation centres naturally.’16

9.

In accordance with received custom in the Church and the biblical symbolism connected
with an altar, the table of a fixed altar should be of stone, indeed of natural stone. But, at the
discretion of the conference of bishops, any becoming, solid, and finely wrought material
may be used in erecting an altar.
The pedestal or base of the table may be of any sort of material, provided it is becoming
and solid. 17

10.

The altar is of its very nature dedicated to the one God, for the eucharistic sacrifice is offered to the one God. This is the sense in which the Church’s practice of dedicating altars
to God in honour of the saints must be understood. St. Augustine expresses it well:‘It is not
to any of the martyrs, but to the God of the martyrs, though in memory of the martyrs,
that we raise our altars.’18
This should be made clear to the people. In new churches statues and pictures of saints
may not be placed above the altar.
Likewise, when relics of saints are exposed for veneration, they should not be placed on
the table of the altar.

11.

It is fitting to continue the tradition in the Roman liturgy of placing relics of martyrs or
other saints beneath the altar.19 But the following should be noted.
a)

Such relics should be of a size sufficient for them to be recognizable as parts of human bodies. Hence excessively small relics of one or more saints must not be placed
beneath an altar.
b) The greatest care must be taken to determine whether the relics in question are authentic.
It is better for an altar to be dedicated without relics than to have relics of doubtful
authenticity placed beneath it.
c) A reliquary must not be placed on the altar or set into the table of the altar, but placed
beneath the table of the altar, as the design of the altar permits.
When the rite of depositing relics takes place, it is highly recommended to keep a vigil at
the relics of the martyr or saint, in accordance with the provisions of chapter two, no. 10.

16
17
18
19

GIRM, no. 262.
See GIRM, no. 263/
Augustine, Contra Faustum 20, 21: PL 42, 384.
See GIRM, no. 266.

Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions  17

III. Celebration of the Dedication
Minister of the Rite
12. Since the bishop has been entrusted with the care of the particular Church, it is his responsibility to dedicate to God new altars built in his diocese.
If he cannot himself preside at the rite, he shall entrust the function to another bishop,
especially to one who is his associate and assistant in the pastoral care of the community
for which the new altar has been erected or, in altogether special circumstances, to a priest,
to whom he shall give a special mandate.
Choice of Day
13. Since an altar becomes sacred principally by the celebration of the eucharist, in fidelity
to this truth the celebration of Mass on a new altar before it has been dedicated is to be
carefully avoided, so that the Mass of dedication may also be the first eucharist celebrated
on the altar.
14.

A day should be chosen for the dedication of a new altar when the people can be present
in large numbers, especially a Sunday, unless pastoral considerations suggest otherwise.
However, the rite of the dedication of an altar may not be celebrated during the Easter
triduum, on Ash Wedncsday, the weekdays of Holy Week, and All Souls.

Mass of the Dedication
15. The celebration of the eucharist is inseparably bound up with the rite of the dedication of
an altar. The Mass is the Mass for the dedication of an altar. On Christmas, Epiphany, Ascension, Pentecost, and on the Sundays of Advent, Lent, and the Easter season, the Mass is
the Mass of the day, with the exception of the prayer over the gifts and the preface, which
are closely interwoven with the rite itself.
16.

It is fitting that the bishop concelebrate the Mass with the priests present, especially with
those who have been given charge over the parish or the community for which the altar
has been erected.

Parts of the Rite
A. Introductory Rites
17. The introductory rites of the Mass of the dedication of an altar take place in the usual way
except that in place of the penitential rite the bishop blesses water and with it sprinkles
the people and the new altar.
B. Liturgy of the Word
18. It is commendable to have three readings in the liturgy of the word, chosen, according
to the rubrical norm, either from the liturgy of the day (see no. 15) or from those in the
Lectionary for the rite of the dedication of an altar (nos. 704 and 706).
19.

After the readings, the bishop gives the homily, in which he explains the biblical readings
and the meaning of the dedication of an altar.
After the homily, the profession of faith is said.The general intercessions are omitted, since
the Litany of the Saints is sung in their place.

18   Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions

C. Prayer of Dedication and the Anointing of the
Altar Depositing of the Relics of the Saints
20. If it is to take place, the relics of martyrs or other saints are placed beneath the altar after
the Litany of the Saints.The rite is meant to signify that all who have been baptized in the
death of Christ, especially those who have shed their blood for the Lord, share in Christ’s
passion (see no. 5).
21.

22.

Prayer of Dedication
The celebration of the eucharist is the most important and the one necessary rite for
the dedication of an altar. Nevertheless, in accordance with the universal tradition of the
Church in both East and West, a special prayer of dedication is also said. This prayer is a
sign of the intention to dedicate the altar to the Lord for all times and a petition for his
blessing.
Rites of Anointing, Incensing, Covering, and Lighting the Altar
The rites of anointing, incensing, covering, and lighting the altar express in visible signs
several aspects of the invisible work that the Lord accomplishes through the Church in its
celebration of the divine mysteries, especially the eucharist.
a)

b)

c)

d)

Anointing of the altar: The anointing with chrism makes the altar a symbol of Christ,
who, before all others, is and is called ‘The Anointed One’; for the Father anointed
him with the Holy Spirit and constituted him the High Priest so that on the altar of
his body he might offer the sacrifice of his life for the salvation of all.
Incense is burned on the altar to signify that Christ’s sacrifice, there perpetuated in
mystery, ascends to God as an odour of sweetness, and also to signify that the people’s
prayers rise up pleasing and acceptable, reaching the throne of God.20
The covering of the altar indicates that the Christian altar is the altar of the eucharistic
sacrifice and the table of the Lord; around it priests and people, by one and the same
rite but with a difference of function, celebrate the memorial of Christ’s death and
resurrection and partake of his supper. For this reason the altar is prepared as the
table of the sacrificial banquet and adorned as for a feast. Thus the dressing of the
altarc1early signifies that it is the Lord’s table at which all God’s people joyously meet
to be refreshed with divine food, namely, the body and blood of Christ sacrificed.
The lighting of the altar teaches us that Christ is ‘a light to enlighten the nations’;21 his
brightness shines out in the Church and through it in the whole human family.

D. Celebration of the Eucharist
23. After the altar has been prepared, the bishop celebrates the eucharist, the principal and
the most ancient part of the whole rite,22 because the celebration of the eucharist is in the
closest harmony with the rite of the dedication of an altar:
– For the celebration of the eucharistic sacrifice achieves the end for which the altar
was erected and expresses this end by particularly clear signs.

20

21
22

See Rev 8:3-4: An angel ‘who had a golden censer, came and stood at the altar. A large quantity of
incense was given to him to offer with the prayers of all the saints on the golden altar that stood in front
of the throne; and so from the angel’s hand the smoke of the incense went up in the presence of God
and with it the prayers of the saints.’
Lk 2:32.
See Pope Vigilius, Epistula ad Profuturum Episcopum 4: PL 84, 832.

Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions  19

– Furthermore, the eucharist, which sanctifies the hearts of those who receive it, in a
sense consecrates the altar, as the ancient Fathers of the Church often assert: ‘This
altar should be an object of awe: by nature it is stone, but it is made holy when it
receives the body of Christ.’23
– Finally, the bond closely connecting the dedication of an altar with the celebration
of the eucharist is likewise evident from the fact that the Mass for the dedication has
its own preface, which is a central part of the rite itself.

IV. Adaptation of the Rite
Adaptations within the Competence of the Conferences of Bishops
24. The conferences of bishops may adapt this rite, as required, to the character of each region,
but in such a way that nothing of its dignity and solemnity is lost.
However, the following are to be respected:
a)

The celebration of Mass with the proper preface and prayer for a dedication must
never be omitted.
b) Rites that have a special meaning and force from liturgical tradition (see no. 22) must
be retained, unless weighty reasons stand in the way, but the wording may be suitably
adapted if necessary.
With regard to adaptations, the competent ecclesiastical authority is to consult the Holy
See and introduce adaptations with its consent.24
Adaptations within the Competence of the Ministers
25. It is for the bishop and for those in charge of the celebration of the rite to decide whether
to have the depositing of relics of the saints; in so doing, they are to follow what is laid
down in no. 11 and they are to take as the decisive consideration the spiritual good of the
community and a proper sense of liturgy.
It is for the rector of the church in which the altar is to be dedicated, helped by those who
assist him in the pastoral work, to decide and prepare everything concerning the readings,
singing, and other pastoral aids to foster the fruitful participation of the people and to
ensure a dignified celebration.

V. Pastoral Preparation
26.

The people are to be informed in good time about the dedication of a new altar and they
are to be properly prepared to take an active part in the rite. Accordingly, they should be
taught what each rite means and how it is carried out. For the purpose of giving this instruction, use may be made of what has been said earlier about the nature and dignity of
an altar and the meaning and import of the rites. In this way the people will be imbued
with the rightful love that is owed to the altar.

VI. Requisites for the Dedication of an Altar
27.

For the celebration of the rite the following should be prepared:
– The Roman Missal;
– The Lectionary;
– The Roman Pontifical;

23
24

John Chrysostom, Homilia 20 in 2 Cor 3: PG 61, 540.
See SC. art. 40.

20   Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions

–
–
–
–
–
–

28.

29.

30.

the cross and the Book of the Gospels to be carried in the procession;
container of water to be blessed and sprinkler;
container with the holy chrism;
towels for wiping the table of the altar;
if needed, a waxen linen cloth or waterproof covering of the same size as the altar;
basin and jug of water, towels, and all that is needed for washing the bishop’s
hands;
– linen gremial;
– brazier for burning incense or aromatic spices; or grains of incense and small candles
to bum on the altar;
– censer, incense boat and spoon;
– chalice, corporal, purificators, and hand towel;
– bread, wine, and water for the celebration of Mass;
– altar cross, unless there is already a cross in the sanctuary, or the cross that is carried
in the entrance procession is to be placed near the altar;
– altar cloth, candles, and candlesticks;
– flowers, if opportune.
For the Mass of the dedication the vestments are white or of some festive colour. The following should be prepared:
– for the bishop: alb, stole, chasuble, mitre, pastoral staff, and pallium, if the bishop has
the right to wear one;
– for the concelebrating priests: the vestments for concelebrating Mass;
– for the deacons: albs, stoles, and dalmatics;
– for other ministers: albs or other lawfully approved dress.
If relics of the saints are to be placed beneath the altar, the following should be prepared:
a) In the place from which the procession begins:
– a reliquary containing the relics, placed between flowers and lights. But as circumstances dictate, the reliquary may be placed in a suitable part of the sanctuary before
the rite begins;
– for the deacons who will carry the relics to be deposited: albs, red stoles, if the relics
are those of a martyr, or white in other cases, and, if available, dalmatics. lf the relics
are carried by priests, then, in place of dalmatics, chasubles should be prepared. Relics may also be carried by other ministers, vested in albs or other lawfully approved
dress.
b) In the sanctuary:
– a small table on which the reliquary is placed during the first part of the dedication
rite.
c) In the sacristy:
– a sealant or cement to close the cover of the aperture. In addition, a stonemason
should be on hand to close the depository of the relics at the proper time.
It is fitting to observe the custom of enclosing in the reliquary a parchment on which is
recorded the day, month, and year of the dedication of the altar, the name of the bishop
Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions  21

who celebrated the rite, the titular of the church, and the names of the martyrs or saints
whose relics are deposited beneath the altar.
A record of the dedication of the church is to be drawn up in duplicate and signed by the
bishop, the rector of the church, and representatives of the local community; one copy is
to be kept in the diocesan archives, the other in the archives of the church.

Outline of the Rite
Introductory Rites
Entrance into the Church
Entrance Procession
Greeting
Blessing and Sprinkling of Water
Hymn: Gloria
Opening Prayer

Liturgy of the Word
First Reading
Responsorial Psalm
Second Reading
Gospel Acclamation
Gospel
Homily
Profession of Faith

Prayer of Dedication and the Anointings
Invitation to Prayer
Litany of the Saints
Concluding Prayer
[Depositing of the Relics]
Prayer of Dedication
Anointing of the Altar
Incensation of the Altar
Lighting of the Altar

Liturgy of the Eucharist
Preparation of the Altar and the Gifts
Prayer over the Gifts
Eucharistic Prayer
Communion
Prayer after Communion

Concluding Rite
Blessing and Dismissal
22   Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions

Chapter Five
Rite

of

Blessing

a

Church

Introduction
1.

Since sacred edifices, that is, churches, are permanently set aside for the celebration of the
divine mysteries, it is right for them to receive a dedication to God. This is done according to the rite in chapters two and three for dedicating a church, a rite impressive for its
striking ceremonies and symbols.
Oratories, chapels, or other sacred edifices set aside only temporarily for divine worship
because of special conditions, more properly receive a blessing, according to the rite described below.

2.

As to the structure of the liturgy, the choice of a titular, and the pastoral preparation of the
people, what is said in the Introduction to chapter two, nos. 4-5, 7, 20, is to be followed,
with the necessary modifications.
A church or an oratory is blessed by the bishop of the diocese or by a priest delegated by
him.

3.

A church or an oratory may be blessed on any day, apart from the Easter triduum. As far
as possible a day should be chosen when the people can be present in large numbers, especially a Sunday, unless pastoral considerations suggest otherwise.

4.

On days mentioned in the Table of Liturgical Days, nos. 1-4, the Mass is the Mass of the
day; but on other days the Mass is either the Mass of the day or the Mass of the titular of
the church or oratory.

5.

For the rite of the blessing of a church or an oratory all things needed for the celebration
of Mass are prepared. But even though it may have already been blessed or dedicated, the
altar should be left bare until the beginning of the liturgy of the eucharis!. In a suitable
place in the sanctuary the following also should be prepared:
–
–
–
–

6.

7.

container of water to be blessed and sprinkler;
censer, incense boat and spoon;
The Roman Pontifical;
altar cross, unless there is already a cross in the sanctuary, or the cross that is carried
in the entrance procession is to be placed near the altar;
– altar cloth, candles, candlesticks, and flowers, if opportune.
When at the same time as the church is blessed the altar is to be consecrated, all those
things should be prepared that are listed in chapter four, no. 27 and no. 29, if relics of the
saints are to be deposited beneath the altar.
For the Mass of the blessing of a church the vestments are white or some festive color.The
following should be prepared:
–
–
–
–

for the bishop: alb, stole, chasuble, mitre, pastoral staff;
for a priest: the vestments for celebrating Mass;
for the concelebrating priests: the vestments for concelebrating Mass;
for the deacons: albs, stoles, and dalmatics;
Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions  23

– for other ministers: albs or other lawfully approved dress.

Outline of the Rite
Introductory Rites
Entrance into the Church
Greeting
Blessing and Sprinkling of Water
Hymn: Gloria
Opening Prayer

Liturgy of the Word
First Reading
Responsorial Psalm
Second Reading
Gospel Acclamation
Gospel
Homily
[Profession of Faith)

Blessing Of The Altar
Prayer of Blessing
lncensation of the Altar and People

Liturgy of the Eucharist
Preparation of the Altar
Presentation of the Gifts
Eucharistic Prayer
Communion
[Inauguration of the Blessed Sacrament Chapel]
Prayer after Communion

Concluding Rite
Blessing and Dismissal

24   Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions

Chapter Six
Rite

of

Blessing

an

Altar

Introduction
1.

‘A fixed altar is one so constructed that it is attached to the floor so that it cannot be
moved; a movable altar can be transferred from place to place.’25
A fixed altar is to be dedicated according to the rite described in chapter four. A movable
altar also deserves religious respect because it is a table set aside solely and permanently
for the eucharistic banquet. Consequently, before a movable altar is put to use, if it is not
dedicated, it should at least be blessed with the following rite.26

2.

A movable altar may be constructed of any solid material that the traditions and culture of
different regions determine to be suitable for liturgical use.27

3.

To erect a movable altar what is laid down in the Introduction to chapter four, nos. 6-10,
is to be followed, with the necessary modifications. However, it is not permissible to place
the relics of saints in the base of a movable altar.

4.

It is appropriate that a movable altar be blessed by the bishop of the diocese or by the priest
who is rector of the church.

5.

A movable altar may be blessed on any day, except Good Friday and Holy Saturday. As
far as possible, a day should be chosen when the people can be present in large numbers,
especially a Sunday, unless pastoral considerations suggest otherwise.

6.

In the rite of blessing a movable altar the Mass is the Mass of the day.

7.

The altar should be left bare until the beginning of the liturgy of the eucharist. Hence a
cross (if need be), and altar cloth, candles, and everything else necessary to prepare the altar
should be on hand at a convenient place in the sanctuary.

25
26
27

GIRM, no. 261.
See GIRM, no. 265.
See GIRM, no. 264.

Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions  25

Outline of the Rite
Introductory Rites
Liturgy of the Word
First Reading
Responsorial Psalm
[Second Reading]
Gospel Acclamation
Gospel
Homily
[Profession of Faith]
General Intercessions

Blessing of the Altar
Invitation to Prayer
Prayer of Blessing
Sprinkling and Incensation of the Altar

Liturgy of the Eucharist
Preparation of the Altar
Presentation of the Gifts
Eucharistic Prayer
Communion
Prayer after Communion

Concluding Rite
Blessing and Dismissal

26   Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions

Chapter Seven
Rite

of

Blessing

a

Chalice

and

Paten

Introduction
1.

The chalice and paten for offering, consecrating, and receiving the bread and wine have as
their sole and permanent purpose the celebration of the eucharist and are therefore ‘sacred
vessels.’

2.

The intention to devote these vessels entirely to the celebration of the eucharist is expressed in the presence of the community through a special blessing, which is preferably
to be imparted within Mass.

3.

Any priest may bless a chalice and paten, provided they have been made in conformity
with the norms given in the General Instruction of the Roman Missal nos. 290-295.

4.

If only a chalice or only a paten is to be blessed, the text should be modified accordingly.



See GIRM. no. 289.
Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions  27

Outline of the Rite
Introductory Rites
Liturgy of the Word
Readings
Homily
General Intercessions

Blessing of the Chalice and Paten
Placing of the Chalice and Paten on the Altar
Prayer of Blessing

Liturgy of the Eucharist
Preparation of the Altar
Presentation of the Gifts
Eucharistic Prayer
Communion
Prayer after Communion

Concluding Rite
Blessing and Dismissal

Outline of the Rite (Outside Mass)
Introductory Rites
Greeting
Brief Address

Liturgy of the Word
Reading(s)
Homily

Blessing of the Chalice and Paten
Placing of the Chalice and Paten on the Altar
Prayer of Blessing
General Intercessions
Lord’s Prayer
Concluding Prayer

Concluding Rite
Blessing and Dismissal
28   Rite of Dedication of a Church and an Altar, Introductions

 id="file23242830" filename="religion-epistemology" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/religion-epistemology/">
 The Epistemology of Religion 
 First published Wed Apr 23, 1997; substantive revision Tue Jun 22, 2021 
 Contemporary epistemology of religion may conveniently be treated as a debate over whether evidentialism applies to religious beliefs, or whether we should instead adopt a more permissive epistemology. Here evidentialism is the initially plausible position that a belief is justified only if “it is proportioned to the evidence . For example, suppose a local weather forecaster has noticed that over the two hundred years since records began a wetter than average Winter is followed in 85% of cases by a hotter than average Summer. Then, assuming for simplicity that the records are reliable, the forecaster is justified in believing with less than full confidence that this Winter, which is wetter than average, will be followed by a hotter than average Summer. But evidentialism implies that it would not be justified to have full belief, that is belief with 100% confidence. Again, consider someone who has a hunch that this Summer will be hotter than average but cannot justify that hunch further. Hunches are not considered evidence, so the belief is not considered justified. If, however, the huncher can cite a good track record of hunches about the weather that have turned out correct then the belief would be considered justified. For although hunches are not considered evidence, memories about past hunches are, as are the observations that corroborated the past hunches. 
 Evidentialism implies that full religious belief is justified only if there is conclusive evidence for it. It follows that if the arguments for there being a God, including any arguments from religious experience, are at best probable ones, no one would be justified in having a full belief that there is a God. And the same holds for other religious beliefs, such as the belief that God is not just good in a utilitarian fashion but loving, or the belief that there is an afterlife. Likewise it would be unjustified to believe even with less than full confidence that, say, Krishna is divine or that Mohammed is the last and most authoritative of the prophets, unless a good case can be made for these claims from the evidence. 
 Evidentialism, then, sets rather high standards for justification, standards that the majority do not, it would seem, meet when it comes to religious beliefs, where many rely on “faith , which is more like the forecaster’s hunch about the weather than the argument from past climate records. Many others take some body of scripture, such as the Bible or the Koran as of special authority, contrary to the evidentialist treatment of these as just like any other books making various claims. Are these standards too high? 
 This century has seen a turn in the debate, with emphasis on the implications of disagreement, “How can sincere intelligent people disagree? Should not we all suspend judgement?  
 1. Simplifications 
 Epistemology is confusing because there are several sorts of items to be evaluated and several sorts of evaluation. Since the topic of this article is the epistemology of religion not general epistemology it will be assumed that what is being evaluated is something related to faith, namely individual religious beliefs, and that the way of evaluating religious beliefs is as justified or unjustified. 
 This entry, therefore, concentrates on questions such as, “Is it justified for Fatima to believe in God? , “Is it justified for Richard to believe in the Trinity? , or “Is it justified for Ramanujan to believe that Krishna is a human incarnation of the divine?  It ignores such questions as whether these beliefs count as knowledge or whether these beliefs are scientific. It also ignores disputes between coherence theorists and foundationalists and disputes over whether belief is voluntary. Although these have some implications for the epistemology of religion they are primarily topics in general epistemology. 
 Although the topic is religious belief the same questions can be asked about faith in the absence of belief, where the standards might be more lax. For example John Schellenberg (2009) has argued that it is not justified to believe in a personal God, not justified to have faith in a personal God , not justified even to believe in something ultimate but it is justified to have a religious attitude of faith in something ultimate. Finally, and more controversially, this entry concentrates on Western epistemology of religion, which is not, however, the same as the epistemology of Western religion. Note, though, that epistemological disputes between Hindu and Buddhist philosophers over a thousand years ago are much the same as those here considered. 
 2. The Rejection of Enlightenment Evidentialism 
 Most contemporary epistemology of religion may be called post modern in the sense of being a reaction to the Enlightenment, in particular to the thesis of the hegemony of evidentialism. (Compare Vanhoozer 2003.) Hegemony is discussed below, but first consider evidentialism. This is the initially plausible position that a belief is justified only if “it is proportioned to the evidence . (Beliefs proportioned to the evidence include, as a special case, the evidence itself.) Here several sorts of evidence are allowed. One consists of beliefs in that which is “evident to the senses , that is, beliefs directly due to sense-experience. Another sort of evidence is that which is “self-evident , that is, obvious once you think about it. Evidence may also include the beliefs directly due to memory and introspection. Again moral convictions might count as evidence, even if not treated as “self-evident . But in order to state the sort of evidentialism characteristic of Enlightenment thought, it is stipulated that no beliefs asserting the content of religious or mystical experiences count as evidence. For example, if Fatima had an experience that she would describe as of the presence of God she should not treat God’s presence to her as a piece of evidence. That does not prevent the claim that someone has had a religious experience with a certain content from counting as evidence. For example, the fact that Fatima had an experience as if of God’s presence would be a piece of evidence. Likewise the fact that various people report miracles counts as evidence. 
 Evidentialism implies that no full religious belief (i.e., a religious belief held with full confidence) is justified unless there is conclusive evidence for it, or it is self-evident. The content of religious experience has been stipulated not to count as evidence. Even if, as Descartes held, the existence of God is self-evident, beliefs such as Richard’s in the Trinity and Ramanujan’s in the divinity of Krishna are not. So the only available evidence for these beliefs would seem to be non-religious premises, from which the religious beliefs are inferred. Therefore, the only way of deciding whether the religious beliefs are justified would be to examine various arguments with the non-religious beliefs as premises and the religious beliefs as conclusions. 
 According to evidentialism it follows that if the arguments for there being a God, including any arguments from religious experience, are at best probable ones, and if, as most hold, God’s existence is not self-evident then no one would be justified in having full belief that there is a God. And the same holds for other religious beliefs. Likewise, it would not be justified to believe even partially (i.e., with less than full confidence) if there is not a balance of evidence for belief. 
 In fact it seems that many religious believers combine full belief with “doubts  in the sense of some reasons for doubting, or they combine partial belief with what they take to be weighty reasons for disbelief. According to evidentialism this is not justified. Other believers consider that, on reflection, they have little reason for doubting but that they have almost no positive evidence for their religious beliefs. According to evidentialism this too is unjustified. This raises the question, how can we adjudicate between an epistemological thesis which might otherwise be believed and a religious belief which that thesis implies is unjustified? The Enlightenment assumed two related, hegemony theses, those of epistemology and of evidentialism. The hegemony of epistemology states that (a) human beings can discover the correct epistemology in isolation from discovering actual human tendencies to form beliefs, and so (b) there is an overriding reason to use the correct epistemology (once discovered) to correct the above-mentioned tendencies. The hegemony of evidentialism adds to the hegemony of epistemology the further thesis that (c) evidentialism is the correct epistemology. If, according to evidentialism, full or even partial religious beliefs are unjustified, then, given the hegemony of evidentialism there is an overriding reason to reject those beliefs. Perhaps the clearest exponent of this position is the comparatively recent Clifford whose use of moral vocabulary conveys well the overriding character of the reasons epistemology is said to provide. His position is summed up in the famous quotation: “It is wrong always, everywhere, and for anyone, to believe anything upon insufficient evidence  (Clifford 1879: 186). 
 At the other extreme from Clifford is the position of fideism, namely, that if an epistemological theory such as evidentialism conflicts with the holding of religious beliefs then that is so much the worse for the epistemological theory. 
 The rejection of the hegemony of epistemology is quite compatible with holding a hegemony thesis for a fragment of epistemology. Such a fragment might, for instance, contain the principle of self-referential consistency, relied upon by Plantinga (1983: 60). This states that it is not justified to have a belief according to which that belief is itself not justified. Consider, for instance, the extreme case of the person who believes that no belief is justified unless it can be proven from premises everyone agrees upon. 
 Postmodernism implies more than being post modern in the above sense. For it is the rejection of the hegemony of even a fragment of epistemology. That might seem agreeable to fideists. Postmodernism tends, however, to trivialize fideism by obliterating any contrast between faith in divine revelation and trust in human capacities to discover the truth. (For a discussion of fideism and postmodernism see Stiver 2003.) 
 Much contemporary epistemology of religion seeks to avoid the extremes both of the Enlightenment thesis of the hegemony of evidentialism and of fideism. It is thus post modern without necessarily being postmodernist. Call the injunction to avoid these extremes the problematic of contemporary epistemology of religion. 
 3. Evidentialism Defended 
 One response to the problematic is to separate evidentialism from the hegemony of epistemology. Evidentialism may then be defended by noting how we implicitly rely upon evidentialist principles in many different areas of enquiry, or by noting which principles generalise various particular examples of justified and unjustified reasoning. Such a defence of evidentialism is part of the project of some contemporary philosophers who seek to attack theism in favour of agnosticism and/or atheism. This defence may well be implicit in Flew’s famous “The Presumption of Atheism  (1972). It is more explicit in Scriven’s Primary Philosophy (1966, ch 4). Scriven and Flew are relying on the Ockhamist principle that, in the absence of evidence for the existence of things of kind X, belief in Xs is not reasonable. This they can defend by means of examples in which non-Ockhamist thinking is judged not to be justified. So even if the whole of evidentialism is not defended, the Ockhamist fragment of it may be. 
 Not surprisingly the reliance of non-theist philosophers on evidentialism has been criticised. First there is an ad hominem. Shalkowski (1989) has pointed out that these defenders of evidentialism tend in fact to be atheists not agnostics, yet a careful examination, he says, of the examples used to support Ockham’s Razor show that either they are ones in which there is independent evidence for denying the existence of Xs or ones in which suspense of judgement seems to be the appropriate response, not denial. Another criticism is Plantinga’s claim that evidentialism is self-referentially inconsistent for there is no evidence for evidentialism (Plantinga 1983: 60). This might be met in either of two ways. First, it could be said that all that is being defended is the Ockhamist fragment of evidentialism and that this is not itself vulnerable to Ockham’s Razor. Or it could be argued that deriving an epistemology from a wide range of examples is evidence for it. To be sure this is far from conclusive evidence. But even a less than full belief in an epistemological thesis which showed theism to be unjustified would be damaging. This may be illustrated using an example with artificial numerical precision: 80% confidence in an epistemology which showed that no degree of belief in theism greater than 60% was justified is incompatible with a degree of belief in theism greater than 68%. The person in question could have a degree of belief of in the conjunction of theism and the (80% likely) epistemology of no greater than 48% (80% of 60%) and a degree of belief in the conjunction of theism and the denial of that epistemology of no greater than 20% (since that epistemology has a probability of 80%). 
 4. Natural theology 
 Theistic philosophers may, of course, grant evidentialism and even grant its hegemony, but defend theism by providing the case which evidentialists demand. Here the details of the arguments are not within the scope of an article on epistemology. What is of interest is the kind of argument put forward. For a start there is the project of demonstrating God’s existence, and this project is not restricted to neo-Thomists. (See Craig 1979, Braine 1988, Miller 1991.) To show the justifiability of full belief that there is a God it is sufficient (a) to have a deductively valid argument from premisses which are themselves justifiably held with full belief unless defeated by an objection and (b) to have considered and defeated all available objections to either the premisses, the conclusion or any intermediate steps. Some of the premisses of these arguments are said to be self-evident, that is, obvious once you think about it. (E.g., the denial of the explanatory power of an infinite causal regress, or the principle that the existence of any composite thing needs to be explained). And that raises a further epistemological problem. Does something’s being self-evident to you justify your full belief in it even if you know of those of equal or greater intellectual ability to whom it is not self-evident? 
 Many natural theologians have, however, abandoned the search for demonstrative arguments, appealing instead to ones which are probable, either in the sense of having weight but being inconclusive or in the sense of having a mathematical probability assigned to them. Notable in this regard are Mitchell’s cumulative argument (Mitchell 1973) and Swinburne’s Bayesian reliance on probability (Swinburne 1979). In a popular exposition of his argument Swinburne appeals instead to an inference to the best explanation (Swinburne 1995; see also Forrest 1996). While there are differences of approach, the common theme is that there is evidence for theism but evidence of a probable rather than a conclusive kind, justifying belief but not full belief. 
 5. The Relevance of Newman 
 Although pre-dating the current debate, John Henry Newman’s rejection of Locke’s and Paley’s evidentialism is relevant to the problematic of contemporary epistemology of religion. First he quite clearly rejected the hegemony of epistemology. His procedure was to examine how in fact people made up their minds on non-religious issues and argue that by the same standards religious beliefs were justified. As a result he qualified evidentialism by insisting that an implicit and cumulative argument could lead to justified certainty. (See Mitchell 1990.) 
 Newman’s position has two interpretations. One, which differs little from Swinburne’s probabilistic approach to natural theology, asserts that the consilience of a number of independent pieces of probable reasoning can result in a probability so high as to be negligibly different from certainty. If, to use an example Newman would not have liked, Aquinas’s five ways were independent and each had probability 75% then taken together their probability is about 99.9%. One difficulty with this interpretation is that even a highly probable argument differs from a demonstration in that the former is vulnerable to probabilistic counter-arguments. Thus a probabilistic version of the Argument from Evil might subsequently reduce the probability from 99.9% down to 75% again. 
 The other interpretation of Newman’s position is to say that evidentialism falsely presupposes that there are fine gradations on a scale from full belief through partial belief to partial disbelief to full disbelief. Newman claims that human beings are not like that when it comes to those beliefs which form part of religious faith. In such cases the only available states are those of full belief and full disbelief or, perhaps, full belief, and lack of full belief. Of course someone can believe that theism has a probability between 90% and 60%, say, but that could be interpreted as believing that relative to the evidence theism has a probability between 90% and 60%, which, in turn, is a comment on the strength of the case for theism not the expression of a merely partial belief. 
 If Newman is right then evidentialism is slightly wrong. Instead of requiring belief to be proportioned to the evidence, full belief is justified if the case for it holds “on the balance of probabilities . Hence a natural theology consisting of merely probable arguments, such as Swinburne’s, can still show full religious belief to be justified. 
 6. Wittgensteinian Fideism 
 Another reaction to the problematic is Wittgensteinian fideism, the thesis that there are various different “language games , and that while it is appropriate to ask questions about justification within a language game it is a mistake to ask about the justification of “playing  the game in question. In this way epistemology is relativised to language games, themselves related to forms of life, and the one used for assessing religious claims is less stringent than evidentialism. Here there seems to be both an autonomy thesis and an incommensurability thesis. The autonomy thesis tells us that religious utterances are only to be judged as justified or otherwise by the standards implicit in the religious form of life, and this may be further restricted to Christianity or Hinduism, or any other religion (Malcolm 1992). The incommensurability thesis tells us that religious utterances are unlike scientific or metaphysical claims and so we are confusing different uses of language if we judge religious utterances by the standards of science or metaphysics (Phillips 1992). Stress on the autonomy thesis brings Wittgensteinian fideism close to the fideism of many religious conservatives, but stress on the incommensurability thesis brings it close to the extreme liberal position of Braithwaite (1955), namely that religion is about attitudes not facts, which would, of course, be rejected by religious conservatives. 
 Perhaps the most obvious criticism of Wittgensteinian fideism is that even if the underlying theory of forms of life and language games is granted, it is an historical fact, itself justified by the criteria of the “game  of history, that the tradition to which the majority of Jews, Christians and Muslims belong to is a form of life with heavy metaphysical commitments, and in which such utterances as “There is a God  are intended as much like “There is a star ten times more massive than the Sun  as like “There is hope . So Wittgensteinian fideism is only appropriate for such religions as Zen Buddhism and for some, relatively recent, liberal strands of Judaism and Christianity which have rejected the traditional metaphysical commitment (as in Cupitt 1984). 
 The Wittgensteinian position could be modified to allow a metaphysical “language game  with its own criteria for justification etc, and in which natural theology should be pursued. Then the Judeo-Christian-Islamic “language game  would be part of this larger, autonomous metaphysical “language game . That modified account would cohere with the historical fact of the metaphysical commitment of that religious tradition. In that case, though, it would seem that, not just the Judeo-Christian-Islamic “language game , but all serious intellectual enquiry should also be treated as parts of the one “game , with one set of rules. Thus Wittgensteinian fideism would have been qualified out of existence. 
 Even if you reject Wittgensteinian fideism you might still take a lesson from it. For it must surely be granted that religious utterances are not made in a purely intellectual way. Their entanglement with commitment to a way of life and their emotional charge might help to explain the fact, if it is one, that those who take religion seriously, whether believers or not, do not in fact have a continuous range of degrees of confidence but operate instead with full belief or full disbelief. For, normally, emotionally charged beliefs are either full on or full off, and in abnormal cases tend to be divided rather than partial. Thus, confronted with conflicting evidence about whether your affection is reciprocated you are far less likely to suspend judgement than to oscillate between full belief and full disbelief. Likewise it seems more normal to oscillate between full belief in God in moments of crisis and full disbelief when things go well than to suspend judgement at all times. This ties in with the Newmanian modification of evidentialism, mentioned above. 
 7. Reformed Epistemology 
 An influential contemporary rejection of evidentialism is reformed epistemology, due to Wolterstorff (1976) and Plantinga (1983). As Plantinga develops it in his paper (1983), beliefs are warranted without Enlightenment-approved evidence provided they are (a) grounded, and (b) defended against known objections. Such beliefs may then themselves be used as evidence for other beliefs. But what grounding amounts to could be debated. Later, Plantinga proposed an account of warrant as proper functioning. This account seems to entail that S’s belief that p is grounded in event E if (a) in the circumstances E caused S to believe that p, and (b) S’s coming to believe that p was a case of proper functioning (Plantinga 1993b). It should be noted that the term “warrant  used elsewhere in philosophy as a synonym for “justified  (as in “warranted assertibility ) is used by Plantinga to mean that which has to be adjoined to a true belief for it to be knowledge. (See Plantinga 1993a). Accordingly the most pressing criticism of Plantinga’s later position is that it largely ignores the question of justification, or reasonableness which, as Swinburne explicates it (Swinburne 2001) amounts to whether the religious beliefs are probable relative to total evidence. 
 While the details of grounding might be controversial it may be assumed that reformed epistemologists assert that ordinary religious experiences of awe, gratitude, contrition, etc., ground the beliefs implied by the believer’s sincere reports of such experiences, provided they can be said to cause those beliefs. Such grounded beliefs are warranted provided they can be defended against known objections. They can then be used as evidence for further religious beliefs. Thus if religious experience grounds the belief that God has forgiven you for doing what is wrong to other humans beings, then that is evidence for a personal God who acts in a morally upright fashion. For, it can be argued, only such a God would find anything to forgive in the wrongs you do to your fellow human beings. 
 Jerome Gellman (1992, 2017) draws our attention to the experience of godlessness. This is occasioned by, but not inferred from, the evils that surround us. If Reformed Epistemology is correct this would seem to ground atheism in the same way that the experience of forgiveness can ground theism. 
 One difference between reformed epistemology and fideism is that the former requires defence against known objections, whereas the latter might dismiss such objections as either irrelevant or, worse, intellectual temptations. Included in the objections are not only those such as the Argument from Evil that seek to rebut, but arguments from sociology and, more recently, cognitive science that seek to undermine by proposing a naturalistic cause for basic religious beliefs. For instance, Justin Barrett (2004) posits a HADD (hyperactive/hypersensitive agency detection device), suggesting that a sensitive agency detection device functions properly if the goal is survival but is hypersensitive if the goal is truth. This hypersensitivity then explains the human tendency towards supernatural beliefs, undermining the proper basicality of those beliefs. Clark and Barrett (2011) suggest that this hypersensitivity could itself be part of the divine plan. An alternative, Bayesian, theistic response would be that HADD exaggerates a properly basic probability for theism that is neither high nor too low prior to further evidence. This justifies a part evidentialist, part reformed, program of assessing the all-things-considered probability resulting from the effect of evidence on this basic probability. 
 A difference between reformed epistemology and Wittgensteinian fideism is that the former proposes a universal relaxation of the stringent conditions of evidentialism while the latter only proposes a relaxation for some“language games , including religion. 
 Reformed epistemology could be correct and yet far less significant than its proponents take it to be. That would occur if in fact rather few religious beliefs are grounded in the sorts of ordinary religious experiences most believers have. For it may well be that the beliefs are part of the cause of the experience rather than the other way round (Katz 1978). 
 8. Religious Experience, Revelation and Tradition 
 Reformed epistemology might be thought of as a modification of evidentialism in which the permissible kinds of evidence are expanded. Notable in this context is Alston’s work arguing that certain kinds of religious experience can be assimilated to perception (Alston 1991). 
 The difference between reformed epistemology and Enlightenment-style evidentialism is also shown by a consideration of revelation and inspiration. An evidentialist will consider arguments from the premiss that it is said such and such was revealed or the premiss that so and so claimed to be inspired by God, but a reformed epistemologist might allow as warranted those religious beliefs grounded in the event of revelation or inspiration. Thus Mavrodes has argued that any belief due to a genuine revelation is warranted, and has discussed several modes of revelation (Mavrodes 1988). Zagzebski argues that this would have the unacceptable consequence that warrant, and hence knowledge, becomes totally inaccessible either to the person concerned or the community (Zagzebski 1993a: 204–205). For instance, Mavrodes would probably not consider Ramanujan’s belief that Krishna is divine as warranted, but even if Mavrodes is correct Ramanujan would have no access to this truth about the unwarranted character of his own beliefs. A similar criticism could be made of beliefs grounded in religious experience. In both cases, the question of whether a belief is genuinely grounded in religious experience or is genuinely grounded in inspiration is one that several religious traditions have paid attention to, with such theories as that of discernment of spirits (Murphy, 1990, ch 5). 
 In what might be called “counter-reformed epistemology  it could be allowed that a belief can be warranted if grounded in a religious tradition. Such a belief would have to be caused in the right sort of way by the right sort of tradition. As in the previous cases we might note that such grounding should be partially accessible to the believer. Rather little work has been done on this extension of reformed epistemology, but the social dimension of warrant has been noted (Zagzebski 1993a). 
 More recently Plantinga (2000) has defended a rather different account of divine inspiration, which he calls the Aquinas/Calvin model. This relies upon the doctrine of ‘original sin’ claiming that most humans suffer from a cognitive-affective disorder, but that as a result of Redemption the Holy Spirit heals us so that we are able to function properly, and come to believe the Christian revelation in an immediate, non-inferential manner. In this way the Aquinas/Calvin model supports the Christian metaphysics, which in turn supports the Aquinas/Calvin model. Presumably it will be granted that the probability, y, of the Aquinas/Calvin model given Christian metaphysics is significantly less than 100%, because there are rival Christian models. As a consequence, the probability, z, of Christian metaphysics is less than x/(1−y) where x is the probability of Christian metaphysics given the falsity of the Aquinas/Calvin model. Hence Plantinga’s proposal can succeed only if either y is near 100% or x is not too small. 
 9. Religious Disagreement 
 Religious disagreement is a long-standing problem in philosophy of religion, but in this century there has been great interest in disagreements between theists and atheists as well as the disagreements between followers of various religions. (See Kelly 2005, Christensen 2007, Feldman 2007, Kraft 2007, Feldman and Warfield 2011, Christensen and Lackey 2013) The problem here is obvious: how can sincere intelligent people disagree? Should not both disputants suspend judgement? To be sure, sometimes those who disagree with you are your intellectual inferiors in some respect. Consider, for instance, someone who insisted that π was precisely 22/7. Those who know of and can follow a proof that π is an irrational number may justifiably dismiss that person as a mathematical ignoramus. The case of interest, however, is that in which no such inferiority is on public display. This is referred to as a situation of public epistemic parity. Richard Feldman criticizes the relativist solution to the problem, namely that there is not always a unique reasonable doxastic attitude to a given proposition in a given epistemic situation. He also rejects unargued dismissal, and reaches the conclusion that in situations of epistemic parity disputants should suspend judgement. Many, however, agree with Peter van Inwagen who, in his autobiographical ‘Quam Delicta’ (1994), implies that it is justified for both parties in a dispute to appeal to what is privately available to them. Such private assertions of epistemic superiority are often expressed by saying that someone “just does not get the point . Typically, not getting the point requires a cognitive blind-spot. It is not that you know there is a point you cannot grasp, which reasonably requires some deference to those who claim to grasp it. You fail to see there is a point. A somewhat different response to Feldman is that of Forrest (2019), who argues that when the cases for and against a thesis are of different kinds we may sometimes commit to the thesis, because non-comparability is not the same as epistemic parity. 
 One obvious complication concerning religious disagreements is the appeal to divine inspiration, as a source of private epistemic superiority, as in Plantinga’s “Aquinas/Calvin  model (Plantinga 2000). It is hard to see, though, how this could apply to disputes between two religions that both rely on the role of divine inspiration. Perhaps the only substitute for unargued dismissal is argued dismissal. 
 Bibliography 
 Works Cited 
 Alston, William P., 1991, Perceiving God: The Epistemology of Religious Experience, Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
 Barrett, Justin L., 2004, Why would anyone believe in God?, Lanham: AltaMira. 
 Braine, David, 1988, The Reality of Time and the Existence of God: The Project of Proving God’s Existence, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
 Braithwaite, Richard B., 1955, An Empiricist’s View of the Nature of Religious Belief, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Clark, Kelly James and Barrett, Justin L., 2011, ‘Reidian Religious Epistemology and the Cognitive Science of Religion’, Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 79: 639–675. 
 Clifford, William Kingdon, 1879, Lectures and Essays, F. Pollock (ed.), London: Macmillan. 
 Christensen, David, 2007, ‘Epistemology of Disagreement: The Good News’, Philosophical Review , 116: 187–217. 
 Christensen, David and Jennifer Lackey (eds.), 2013, The Epistemology of Disagreement: New Essays, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Craig, William Lane, 1979, The Kalam Cosmological Argument, London: Macmillan 
 Cupitt, Don, 1984, The Sea of Faith, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Feldman, Richard, 2007, ‘Reasonable Religious Disagreements,’ in L. Antony (ed.), Philosophers without God: Meditations on Atheism and the Secular Life , Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Feldman, Richard and Ted Warfield (eds.), 2011, Disagreement, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Flew, Antony, 1972, “The Presumption of Atheism,  Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 2: 29–46 
 Forrest, Peter, 1996, God without the Supernatural: A Defense of Scientific Theism, Ithaca: Cornell University Press 
 –––, 2019, Intellectual, Humanist and Religious Commitment: Acts of Assent, London: Bloomsbury. 
 Geivett, R.D., and B. Sweetman, 1992, Contemporary Perspectives on Religious Epistemology, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Gellman, Jerome, 1992, “A New Look at the Problem of Evil , Faith and Philosophy, 9: 210–216. 
 –––, 2017, “A Surviving Version of the Common-sense Problem of Evil: A Reply to Tweedt , Faith and Philosophy, 34: 82–92. 
 Katz, Steven, 1978, “Language Epistemology and Mysticism,  in Mysticism and Philosophical Analysis, S. Katz (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Kelly, Thomas, 2005, ‘The Epistemic Significance of Disagreement,’ in J. Hawthorne and T. Gendler Szabo (eds.) Oxford Studies in Epistemology (Volume 1), Oxford: Oxford University Press: 167–196. 
 Kraft, James, 2007, ‘Religious disagreement, externalism, and the epistemology of disagreement: listening to our grandmothers,’ Religious Studies, 43: 417–432. 
 Malcolm, Norman, 1992, “The Groundlessness of Belief , in Geivett and Sweetman 1992, 92–103; reprinted from Reason and Religion, Stuart C. Brown (ed.), Ithaca: Cornell university Press, 1977. 
 Mavrodes, George I., 1988, Revelation in Religious Belief, Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
 Miller, Barry, 1991, From Existence to God : A Contemporary Philosophical Argument, London: Routledge. 
 Mitchell, Basil, 1973, The Justification of Religious Belief, London: Macmillan. 
 –––, 1990, ‘Newman as a Philosopher,’ in Newman after a Hundred Years, I. Ker and A. G. Hill (eds.), Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
 Murphy, Nancey, 1990, Theology in an Age of Scientific Reasoning, Ithaca: Cornell University Press 
 Phillips, D. Z., 1992, ‘Faith, Skepticism, and Religious Understanding’, in Geivett and Sweetman 1992, 81–91; reprinted from D. Z. Phillips, Faith and Philosophical Enquiry, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1970. 
 Plantinga, Alvin, 1983, ‘Reason and Belief in God,’ in Plantinga and Wolterstorff 1983, 16–93. 
 –––, 1993a, Warrant: The Current Debate, Oxford: The Clarendon Press. 
 –––, 1993b, Warrant and Proper Function, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 –––, 2000, Warranted Christian Belief, Oxford: Oxford University Press 
 Plantinga, Alvin and Nicholas Wolterstorff (eds.), 1983, Faith and Rationality, Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press. 
 Scriven, Michael, 1966, Primary Philosophy, New York: McGraw Hill. 
 Shalkowski, Scott, 1989, ‘Atheological Apologetics,’ American Philosophical Quarterly, 26: 1–17. 
 Schellenberg, John, 2009, The will to imagine: a justification of skeptical religion, Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
 Stiver, Dan, 2003, ‘Theological Methodology,’ in Kevin Vanhoozer (ed.), Cambridge Companion to Postmodern Theology, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 170–185. 
 Swinburne, Richard, 1979, The Existence of God, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
 –––, 1996, Is There a God?, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 –––, 2001, Review of Warranted Christian Belief by Alvin Plantinga, Religious Studies, 37: 203–214. 
 Wolterstorff, Nicholas, 1976, Reason within the Bounds of Religion, Grand Rapids: Eerdmans. 
 Vanhoozer, Kevin, 2003, ‘Theology and the condition of postmodernity:a report on knowledge (of God),’ in Kevin Vanhoozer (ed.), Cambridge Companion to Postmodern Theology, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 3–25. 
 Van Inwagen, Peter, 1994, ‘Quam Dilecta,’ in God and the Philosophers , T. V. Morris (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 31–40. 
 Zagzebski Linda, 1993a, ‘Religious Knowledge and the Virtues of the Mind’, in Zagzebski (1993b). 
 Other Important Works 
 Audi, Robert and William J. Wainwright (eds.), 1986, Rationality, Religious Belief, and Moral Commitment, Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
 Geivett, Douglas R. and Brendan Sweetman (eds.), 1992, Contemporary Perspectives on Religious Epistemology, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Howard-Snyder, Daniel (ed.), 1996, The Evidential Argument from Evil, Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
 Plantinga, Alvin, 1998, “Religion and Epistemology  in E. Craig (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Volume 8), London: Routledge. 
 Zagzebski, Linda (ed.), 1993b, Rational Faith: Catholic Responses to Reformed Epistemology, Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame. 
 Other Internet Resources 
 Religious Disagreement, entry by John Pittard in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
 Religious Epistemology, entry by Kelly James Clark in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 

 id="file23242823" filename="religions.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="http://www.humanreligions.info/religions.html">
 81 entries are listed here. It is simply impossible to list all varieties of religion1 as we as a species have created an almost infinite variety of religious and transcendental ideas. Items in lower case italics are classes of religion and not actual religions. For example, "theism" is any religion that contains god(s), and "polytheism" is a form of theism. 
 What data do you want in the table? 
 Options Icons Compact Layout 
 Origins & Background Heritage Area of Origin Founded Founder 
 Description Description God(s)? Afterlife Holy Texts 
 A form of belief, rather than a specific system. Belief that (1) God, if it exists, is by nature unknowable and will always be unknowable, or, (2) that the individual being asked cannot conclude if god exists or not for lack of evidence one way or the other 
 Prehistoric/universal 
 Not defined 
 Peaceful Christian fundamentalist group famous for its rejection of technology and strict adherence to OT and NT laws 
 A form of belief, rather than a specific system. Belief that good relations need to be kept with tribal ancestor spirits. Often a form of Shamanism 
 A form of belief, rather than a specific system. The belief that all objects contain spirits. More a traditional form of belief than a "religion" in the Western sense 
 A form of belief, rather than a specific system. Either (1) the active and extrinsic disbelief that God exists, or (2) an intrinsic lack of belief due to lack of knowledge about god(s) in local culture 
 Dangerous and violent religious community responsible for the 1995 Sarin gas attack on Tokyo's subway and other crimes. Eventually they apologized, stopped using the Bible, and formed the more prosaic group called Aleph 
 A world religion2,3,4. Belief that a series of prophets have come from God, and that Bahá'í is the latest religion founded by God. A liberal offshoot of Islam, but persecuted in Iran 
 This group are preparing to rule the world after a coming apocalypse, and embrace many practices which are now called New Age 
 Apocalyptic suicide cult famed for its dramatic armed fight against authorities in the town of Waco, USA, in 1993 
 A world religion2,3,4,6. The belief that meditation and good living can break the cycle of reincarnation and result in enlightenment 
 Modern reconstructions of Celtic paganism form part of the neo-pagan range of religions 
 A series of civilisations on Earth have arisen but destroyed themselves in nuclear war. Each time, some faithful believers were rescued by flying saucers and put back on Earth 
 A varied cultural religion practiced traditionally on a town-by-town and region-by-region basis 
 Fundamentalist Anti-science flat-earth Christian cult, who also predicted the End of the World would occur 4 different times 
 A world religion2,3,4. Belief that a single creator god had a son, Jesus Christ, born to a human mother, and that Jesus' crucifixion by the Romans brings salvation 
 Fundamentalist Christians active in USA, Israel and Greece who expected the end of the world in year 2000, starting with a nuclear attack on the USA, which they appeared to be trying to instigate themselves 
 A millenarian cult based on the belief that Jesus would return to judge survivors in 1999. Suspected of being on the verge of mass suicide after predictions of the end of the world failed in year 2000 
 A form of belief, rather than a specific system. Belief in a single creator god who is not "personal" and does not have human emotions, and which many believers say does not interact with the world 
 Celtic religion in prehistoric England. Modern reconstructed Druidism is part of the neo-pagan range of religions 
 A form of belief, rather than a specific system. Belief that either (1) There is a good and evil god of equal, or almost-equal power, or (2) there are two gods, such as a male and female one 
 1st century Jewish Christians, possibly the earliest form of Christianity to exist 
 The belief that we must escape from this world, which was created and is ruled by an inferior and unworthy god, and reunite with the true god 
 The embracing of Krishna through correct living, honesty, spiritual life and austerity 
 Apocalyptic suicide cult who combined Biblical eschatology with New Age and ideas about UFOs. All 39 members committed suicide in San Diego, USA in 1997 
 A world religion"Religions of the World" by Breuilly, O'Brien & Palmer (1997)2,10,4. Cultural religion of India which was historically decentralized and disparate and not a single belief system. Western influence made it into a single religion, an identity which Hindus now accept 
 Sexually promiscuous group who fell foul of police suspicion. As is often the case, increasing pressure from outside resulted in the group retreating even further into insanity, and they became The Family, predicting the end of the world 
 A world religion2,3,4. Strict monotheism taught by Muhammad, the world's 2nd largest religion 
 A world religion2,10,4. Beliefs include non-violence and equality of all living things 
 A campaign saw many put this down as their religion on the UK census in 2001. Midichlorians exist in all living beings, which create a 'living force' that can be interacted with 
 A 140-year-old Christian fundamentalist/literalist organisation famous for preaching that the world is about to end (nowadays - because of the existence of the United Nations) 
 A world religion2,3,4. Organized Judaism emerged from Babylonian writings. Belief that God has a special contract with a Hebrew tribe, involving many specific rules of behaviour 
 Roman mystery religion that believed that the Son of the Sun was a saviour who was sacrificed for the good of all 
 Prehistoric/universal 
 Not defined 
 The belief that God is unknowable but accessible, and that doctrinal religion hampers spiritual growth 
 prehistoric 
 A form of belief, rather than a specific system. The rise secularisation has seen public and private religion decline throughout the developed world 
 Prehistoric/universal 
 Not defined 
 A form of belief, rather than a specific system. Normally existing within other belief systems, occult systems concentrate on esoteric meanings in texts, often with magical undertones 
 Apocalyptic suicide cult, with mass suicides in Switzerland, France and Quebec, in preparation for Jesus' second coming 
 A form of belief, rather than a specific system. God is everywhere, and everything, but is not transcendent and may have no distinct consciousness 
 Apocalyptic suicide cult that imploded, resulting in the deaths of over 600 adults and 276 children 
 A form of belief, rather than a specific system. Belief in multiple gods, often in some form of hierarchy 
 Prehistoric/universal 
 Not defined 
 An astika school of Hindu philosophy based around mastering and quieting the mind, involving meditation 
 Christian organisation of evangelists organised along military lines, famous for charity work 
 A combination of West African, Caribbean beliefs with some elements of Roman Catholicism 
 An atheist religion that uses dark and evil symbology for self-development and anti-religious purposes - Satan itself is not a real being, just a symbol 
 Derived from the writings of science fiction author L. Ron Hubbard, a series of practices called Dianetics is used to clear minds of alien influences and attain a state of mental perfection 
 Belief that Shamans need to keep good relations with tribal ancestor spirits for the good fortune of the whole tribe 
 A world religion2,10,4. Official collection of practices in Japan, more cultural than religious 
 A world religion2,10,4. Prayer, meditation and self control to become a soldier of God 
 The belief that the souls of the dead communicate with the living, mostly through Mediums, but, suffered serious credibility problems with the original founders admitted to fraudulently inventing the 'rappings' that formed the communications 
 A form of belief, rather than a specific system. The basis of much symbology used in many subsequent religions 
 A world religion2,3,4. A relaxed and peaceful religion based on following and accepting the flow of life 
 Prehistoric/universal 
 prehistoric 
 Multifaceted 
 A magical system of discerning True Will with inspiration from a host of Egyptian gods 
 Mired in fraud arrests and exposés, the Spiritualism scene had soured, so Madame Blavatsky reinvented her routine as a new religion, using an Indian theme 
 A range of Churches ranging from mostly Christian, to those mostly encapsulating native African spirituality 
 Sun Myung Moon embodied the Second Coming of Christ, and his commercialist church runs a media empire 
 A liberal and diverse pluralist religion accepting of believers without needing them to leave their current religions 
 A form of belief, rather than a specific system. Belief that all people go to heaven 
 A traditional religion from Haiti with an ethical focus on combating greed and promoting honour 
 A description of various cultural practices, which are often part of a parent belief system 
 An ancient religion. Malek Taus looks after the world with 6 other angels. Heavily persecuted by Muslims and accused of Devil Worship 
 As this group got more and more excited about establishing a Kingdom of God, in the approach to year 2000, its leaders were arrested amid fears that it would turn into a suicide cult 
 A world religion10,4. An ancient dualistic religion from Iran with one good god (Ahura Mazda) and one evil one (Ahriman) 

 id="file23242663" filename="religion-theology-and-philosophy-dissertation-topics" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.researchprospect.com/religion-theology-and-philosophy-dissertation-topics/">
 Religion, Theology and Philosophy Dissertation Topics 
 Published by Alvin Nicolas at August 19th, 2021 , Revised On September 21, 2021 
 Introduction 
 As part of the religious, theology, and philosophy studies course, dissertation writing is inherently vital to the final result. Various religions are practised in the world today. Some of the major religions include; Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism, Judaism, and Sikhism. 
 In the contemporary world, religion is often not associated with politics and worldly life. Nevertheless, we can not deny its relationship and influence on humans and global peace. Therefore it is vital to choose a research topic that adds to the current body of literature. 
 To help you choose an appropriate topic and its subsequent research methodology, below is a list of issues classified using the thematic and exploratory approach for the religious studies dissertation. 
 PhD qualified writers of our team have developed these topics, so you can trust to use these topics for drafting your dissertation. 
 W“Our expert dissertation writers can help you with all stages of the dissertation writing process including topic research and selection, dissertation plan, dissertation proposal, methodology, statistical analysis, primary and secondary research, findings and analysis, and complete dissertation writing.“ 
 Covid-19 Religion, Theology and Philosophy Research Topics 
 Research Aim: This study will focus on reviewing the contribution of religious communities to combat the Coronavirus Pandemic. 
 Research Aim: This study will investigate the issues and conflicts that arose in India during the outbreak of COVID-19 and the response of the international countries on it. 
 Research Aim: This study will focus on theological studies on the Coronavirus pandemic. 
 Research Aim: This study will address the importance of philosophy, science, and religion in combatting Coronavirus. 
 World Religions Dissertation Topics 
 Under the category of world religion, the teaching courses cover a range of topics, including the traditional aspects and forms of religion found globally, including the mainstream practising religions such as Buddhism or Catholicism, fastest-growing religion like Islam, and belief systems such as the traditions of the Samurai tribe. 
 Given the highly diverse nature of faith, it is pertinent to explore and analyse this diversity in terms of the continuous evolution of the human race. The list of topics below provides a focused thematic and exploratory approach that may be used for world religion research dissertation purposes. 
 Research Aim: The hatred, intolerance, prejudice, or hostility towards the religion of Islamic and its followers are termed Islamophobia. In the last few years, the increasing trend of Islamophobia has been witnessed in the Western Countries, which at some instances lead to the act of violence and killing of Muslims, for example, the New Zealand mosque shooting in 2019 where 51 Muslims were shot dead by an Islamophobic was extreme evidence of the existence of Islamophobia. Therefore, in today’s time, when millions of Muslims live in Western Countries, it is essential to identify the causes of increasing Islamophobia and how it can be controlled. 
 Research Aim: When someone speaks or writes profanely about a sacred or religious personality, place, or object, it amounts to blasphemy. The seculars and proponents of freedom of speech and expression do not hesitate to malign, mock and insult religion and the holy personages. However, blasphemy can enrage thousands and millions of believers worldwide as they cannot tolerate any disrespect towards their religion or holy personages, and they can become violent. In this study, the global blasphemy laws and how much they prevent blasphemy are explored, and their role in developing global peace is explored based on a survey-based study. 
 Research Aim: When religion is a subject or an object of violence, it is categorized as religious violence. In situations where people show no or lack of religious intolerance towards another religion and its followers, they tend to disapprove, criticize, and even use violence to show their dominance. Given this, it is argued that people have intolerance towards another religion, then their intolerance, if it remains unchecks, can even lead to violence. Therefore, this research aims to evaluate religious intolerance’s causal relationship with religious violence to identify if religious intolerance can trigger religious violence. 
 Research Aim: Atheism is a belief in the non-existence of any God. In the contemporary world, scientific advancements and modern technology have made significant breakthroughs that have unravelled many unexplained phenomena and have consequently changed people’s lives and beliefs. As people’s reliance on science and technology has increased, anything that cannot be proven logically or through scientific evidence is rejected, even if it is God’s existence. In this research past, literature will be critically analyzed to identify what atheism means in today’s modern world and how it has altered people’s beliefs. 
 Research Aim: During recent history, many African Christians have migrated to Western or Developed Countries to save their lives or attain better life prospects and living standards. After living in other Countries, African Christians came into contact with new cultures, traditions, religions, languages, and beliefs, altering their ideas and culture. In this regard, this survey-based study aims to identify whether African Christians have preserved their beliefs and culture while living in Diaspora. 
 Research Aim: In this research, the molecular structure of various tumors is discussed along with the therapeutic issues faced for these ailments and their treatments. Target spots for treatment and different chemical mixes for its treatments are also explained in this research. 
 Research Aim: All religions have some guidelines recorded in holy books and religious scriptures that their believers have to follow. Whether obeying a higher authority’s commands is a common notion in all religions is critically discussed by conducting a thematic analysis of past literature. 
 Research Aim: There are hundreds of religions practised globally that are significantly diversified in terms of beliefs, characteristics, traditions, festivals, and customs. In the past three decades, the increased occurrence of religious-based terrorism worldwide gives rise to a need to explore any causal link present between religious diversity and terrorism. Topic 9 
 Research Aim: The similarities and differences between Hinduism, Islam and Christianity are compared by conducting a thematic analysis. These religions’ religious scriptures will be discussed and compared to identify the shared characteristics present amongst them. 
 Research Aim: Islam has been linked with global terrorism in the media, yet still, it is number one in the list of fastest-growing religions of the world. In this regard, an in-depth exploratory study is to be conducted to identify the underlying reasons. A growing number of people are accepting the religion of Islam. 
 History and Religion Dissertation Topics 
 History and religion have been a topic of interest throughout previous decades and gained particular importance amongst researchers focusing on the impact and influence of religion on culture throughout history. 
 Based on a literature review of the religious references, the researchers have drawn a connection between literature and culture. History and religion are not confined to the evolution or impact of a particular religion. Still, it goes beyond the diversity of religion and focuses on developing the human race throughout time. Below is a list of suggested topics that can be used for history and religion research dissertations. 
 Research Aim: The similarities present between ancient Judaism and Hinduism are critically reviewed. For instance, both religions have a distinct class system that divides people into superior and lower classes. In Judaism, people are divided into Jews and non-Jews, referred to as gentiles, and as per Judaism, gentiles are animals in human form. Similarly, Hinduism divides people into four classes; Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, and Shudras, where Shudras are given animal status. 
 Research Aim: Renaissance was a revolt against the supremacy of Christian theology, pope, the prohibition of learning science and logic, and interference of Church in the personal life of individuals during middle ages starting from 500 to 1400 Century. The renaissance proposed a new idea of humanism where religion must not intervene in an individual’s worldly and religious affairs, and people are free to have their own religion and beliefs. This study will critically analyse how the renaissance impacted the Christian religion and beliefs of European people during the 15th and 16th centuries. 
 Research Aim: As per Christian belief, Jesus Christ was crucified, and he gave his life on the cross so that all Christians can be forgiven for their sins and go to paradise. However, as per Islamic belief, Christ was never crucified. Instead, God ascended Jesus Christ and made the betrayed companion look like Jesus Christ, and the Romans crucified him thinking that he was Jesus Christ. 
 Research Aim: The mass grave of newly born babies found beneath the Catholic Church in Ireland provides evidence to support the myths about secret sex lives of monks and nuns throughout the history of Christian Monasticism. Based on the thematic analysis of the historical evidence found in literature and media, the immorality and hypocrisy of Catholic Monasticism will be critically reviewed. 
 Research Aim: The King of ancient Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar, had destroyed Jerusalem along with the temple of Solomon and exiled all Jews from Jerusalem in 586 BC. Many Jews were taken to Babylon as slaves, while many were dispersed and wandered in the desert for many years. Thematic analysis will be conducted in this study. The historical evidence found in the past literature will be critically reviewed to understand the Jewish Diaspora and their hardships. 
 Research Aim: The religion of Islam, which came in the 7th Century in Arab, has spread to every part of the world today. Today more than 350 million Muslims exist and follow the religion of Islam, which was introduced around 1400 years ago. Although they have been divided into different groups and sects, they still share some common fundamental beliefs. Therefore, an exploratory study will be conducted to identify how Islam has evolved and how its religious foundations are compatible with the modern world. 
 Research Aim: Adolf Hitler was born and raised in a Roman Catholic family. As per his public speeches, he considered Jews to be the true enemy of Christianity, and by fighting against them, he was actually doing God’s work. Therefore, a thematic analysis is to be conducted on the life of Adolf Hitler to ascertain whether his religious doctrine and belief impacted his life. 
 Religion and the Contemporary World Dissertation Topics 
 This theme focuses on topics that analyse the effect of religion within the contemporary world, including the media’s influence and the application of religious beliefs to the modern-day world. 
 This is an interesting topic for those aiming to look at theology and religion together since the implications of religion to the contemporary world has become the focus of discussion and dichotomy. Below is a list of topics that can be used for Religion and the Contemporary World Research Dissertation purposes. 
 Research Aim: Islam is criticized for women subjugation and inequality. Still, women in Western countries willingly accept Islam and follow Islamic practices such as wearing Hijab and covering their heads and faces. If Islam actually subjugates women, then why are independent and educated women in Western countries like France and the UK becoming Muslim. To unrevealed this mystery, an exploratory study is to be conducted where the women who accepted Islam will be interviewed to find out whether Islam subjugated them or uplift their status. 
 Research Aim: Religion tends to hinder scientific developments because religion does not permit anything in line with religious law and guidelines. Today’s contemporary world can no longer follow any such restrictions, which can become a hurdle in scientific advancements and medical breakthroughs. Besides, nowadays, people use scientific evidence and logic to justify something rather than blindly relying on religious explanations. In view of this, a survey-based study is to be performed to determine whether religion has become unnecessary in today’s modern world. 
 Research Aim: In today’s socially and economically unstable and uncertain environment, association with religions and faith communities can enable individuals to have social stability and progress. People tend to look after each other in faith communities. For instance, black Church organisations in London provide work, education and training to black Christians. A thematic analysis will be performed in this research to evaluate whether people can gain social security, better work and prospects by being associated with religious communities. 
 Research Aim: The recent laws and legalization made to give rights and equality to the LGBL community are legally permitting people of the same sexual orientations to marry or live in relationships as partners. However, various religions like Christianity and Islam does not permit any such relationships and legalizing the same-sex marriage and relationship would create more differences in the society. This study will focus on identifying the in-depth view of Christians and Muslims on same-sex marriages and their likely impact on their rights, belief and practices. 
 Research Aim: Women in western countries like America and the UK are given equal rights and responsibilities. In eastern countries like Saudi Arabia and Pakistan, women have lower rights and responsibilities than men. It is argued that when women have equitable rights, they get higher or lower rights than men based on situations. For instance, a woman as a mother has more rights than a man as a father. In view of this, equitable rights give women more privileges as they don’t have to bear the hardships and exploitation. An exploratory study will be conducted in Pakistan to ascertain whether women feel more blessed or cursed by having equality. 
 Research Aim: According to the Islamic belief when people of Mecca in Arab asked the Prophet Muhammad to show a miracle if he is actually a messenger of God, then Prophet Muhammad split the moon in two halves with the movement of this index finger and then rejoined them together. In 1969 the photograph of moon taken by NASA spaceship clearly showed the splitting mark on the surface of moon. Modern astronomers also provide scientific evidence to support the splitting of moon. In this research the scientific evidence to support or oppose the splitting of moon will be critically analysed to determine whether moon was splitting actually splitted. 
 Research Aim: In today’s time when economic and social problems are on rise, it is worth identifying the reasons because of which more and more people are evidently moving towards religions and faith. Therefore a thematic analysis is to be conducted to explore the reasons why people around the world are becoming more religious by demonstrating and practicing their faith. 
 Research Aim: Since the 9/11 terrorist attack, Eastern religions like Sikhism, Hinduism and especially Islam has been suffered greatly as the followers of these religions were perceived terrorists/extremists and were being victimized. The negative portrayal by media created negative image which may have negatively impacted the fair trial of Muslims and followers of other Eastern religions. Therefore an exploratory study is to be conduct to identify the problem which Muslims, Sikhs, and Hindus faced in America after 9/11. 
 Ethics and Religion Dissertation Topics 
 The notion of ethics in religion encompasses morality and various morality components to apply to modern life and daily situations. Morality and religion have gone hand in hand throughout history, and it has been observed that multiple moral conducts are justified with the notion of religious beliefs. 
 For researchers who wish to get a deeper understanding of this relationship, below is a list of topics that can be used for dissertation purposes. 
 Research Aim: The concept of morality is found in every religion. The concept of right and wrong given by religious beliefs and morality are alike. For instance, telling a lie is bad, while speaking the truth is good for both religions and moral values. In this study, the similarities between religious convictions and moral ethics are reviewed to determine whether religious convictions and moral ethics are intertwined. 
 Research Aim: When military action is to be taken against a militant group or terrorists, it would be ethically right to do so in self-defence and protect innocent human lives. Because of this, different religions’ ethical justification to justify military action will be critically reviewed in this study. 
 Research Aim: Ethical egoism is a notion which states that people tend to behave morally only if the moral act would maximize their self-interest. However, a moral code is a set of rules that people follow to live a good life, determining their morals and actions. In this study, the relationship between ethical egoism and moral code will be empirically analyzed. 
 Research Aim: Islam is a religion that prohibits killing innocent people, and killing of an innocent soul is regarded as killing the whole of humanity. In this study, the Islamic teachings and moral code will be critically analyzed to identify whether the Islamic moral code justifies the Terrorism done by Islam’s followers. 
 Research Aim: Morality means the sense of right and wrong or good or bad behaviour. It is claimed that Islam is a religion that is based on goodness, righteousness and teaches to do good in society and be good with everyone. The Islamic teachings will be critically reviewed in this study to determine how it is entrenched with morality. 
 Research Aim: Human rights are based on all human beings’ equality. However, religious beliefs tend to show ethical dichotomy because it divides people’s rights based on believers and non-believers or piety, where the believers or pious people like religious leaders tend to have more rights than the non-believers or followers. This study is important to identify how religious ethics contradiction with human rights. 
 Research Aim: When an act in a particular context or situation is judged following a religion’s ethical standards, instead of by the usual morality standards, it is referred to as situational ethics through faith. It can be argued, and if everyone starts justifying their unethical acts with situational ethics in a multi-ethnic community, they will be going against usual standards of morality. This research aims to identify the impact of situational ethics through religion on a multi-ethnic community and how it can create chaos and injustice in society. 
 Religion and Philosophy Dissertation Topics 
 Religion and philosophy have been going hand in hand throughout history. Philosophy has been used to justify and question God’s supreme power and the fundamentals of religious faith. 
 The basic premise of philosophy and its application to religion is based on trying to ascertain the existence of religion as a possibility. You can find a topic that interests you from the list of religion and philosophy dissertation topics below. 
 Research Aim: When a small object like a clock can never be made on its own unless someone creates it, then how it is possible that such a big and complex world and life can be created on its own without a creator. Because of this notion, in this research, God’s existence is critically analyzed based on its relationship with the existence of life. 
 Research Aim: Based on the argument that nothing can be created on its own and there must be a creator for everything, this idea gives rise to a question that if God exists, then who created God. This question will be critically analyzed by reviewing the fundamental religious beliefs found in the religious literature of various religions. 
 Research Aim: It is argued that today’s Christianity is not what Jesus Christ taught, but it is the beliefs and doctrines developed based on what Saint Paul wrote and taught about Christ and Christianity. Saint Paul wrote the thirteen books of the New Testament, and scholars believe that Paul’s teachings greatly deviated from the actual teachings of Jesus Christ. In this study, Paul and the contribution of Saint Paul in developing today’s Christianity will be critically reviewed to evaluate the argument. 
 Research Aim: In this world, many of the times, the wrongdoers get away from punishment and justice is not provided to the innocent victims. Therefore it is essential that in the hereafter, people can be answerable for their good or bad deeds where they cannot get away after doing injustice, and the victims can be compensated. In this research, the justification for life after death is reviewed in line with the world’s injustice. 
 Research Aim: It is argued that when God is all-loving, and he is present everywhere, how so much evil, violence, and injustice may be possible in his presence, so much evil violence and injustice is possible taking place in the world. Given this statement, this research aims to justify the existence of evil in the world. 
 Research Aim: few things in the world cannot be seen or measured, but they exist, such as pain or magic. Based on this notion, it can be argued that it is not sufficient to deny God’s existence if we cannot see him. This research focuses on determining why it is not enough to disprove God’s presence only because he cannot be seen. 
 Research Aim: In different religions, God’s idea and characteristics are different. Some worship idols, some worship animals and supernatural beings, while others worship non-living objects like the moon, stars, sun, trees, and fire. Therefore in this research, God as an invention by the imagination of believers will be critically discussed. 
 Order a Proposal 
 Worried about your dissertation proposal? Not sure where to start? 
 Architecture and Religion: Built Heritage Dissertation Topics 
 Architecture has played an essential role within the religious communities since it provides a tangible component of the community’s belief in substantiating their religious faith. 
 To understand the true essence of an architectural building within the religious faith, it is essential to look beyond the buildings’ structural aesthetics and understand the deeper engraved intangible value of religious faith that drives the community. Below is a list of topics that might be interesting for architecture and religion-based dissertation. 
 Research Aim: Religious architectural buildings like the synagogue, cathedral, church, shrine, temple, and mosques carry unique religious importance because it symbolizes religious history, culture, give exalted appeal and have a great influence on the religious community. In this research, architectural buildings’ religious importance, namely, synagogue, cathedral, church, shrine, temple, and mosques, will be discussed to identify their religious followers’ respective significance. 
 Research Aim: A church is a structure used by Christians to carry out their religious activities and worship. Traditionally, its interior is built in the Christian cross’s shape, and its components included; center aisle, alter, bema, and seats. However, the church building may also have a courtyard, apse, and mausoleum. The modern church buildings may have different structures and components. Therefore in this study, the traditional and modern church buildings are compared and contrasted to identify the mandatory components of a Christian Church. 
 Research Aim: Religious buildings like churches, temples, and mosques are the holy places where religious followers can worship, practise their faiths, and socialize with their fellow believers to substantiate their beliefs. This research aims to discuss whether, in the absence of religious buildings where followers can affirm their faiths, there are chances that they would lose their religion. 
 Research Aim: The religious buildings are believed to have a divine presence, and people tend to go to such places so that they can feel that divine presence. Given this, it can be argued that a true believer may not necessarily need to visit a religious building to feel the divine presence. Therefore an exploratory study will be conducted to determine whether it is necessary to visit religious architectural spaces to feel the divine presence. 
 Research Aim: Destroying a religious building with significant importance to a religious belief would be equal to disrespecting the divine God and religion. The believers of that religion would not tolerate if their religious building is demolished, and they can react violently and create havoc. Therefore, in this study, what a religious building’s demolition would mean for their religious followers will be evaluated by conducting an in-depth analysis. 
 Research Aim: All religious architectural buildings serve one common purpose: to provide a place for the religious followers to worship, congregate, and practice religious activities. However, different religious architectural buildings may also serve different or additional purposes. This study aims to conduct a comparative study between different religions to determine whether all religious architectural buildings serve the same purpose. 
 Research Aim: In today’s world where millions of people live below the poverty line, constructing an expensive religious building seems to contradict the notion of equality amongst all humankind and basic human rights. However, it can be argued that the poor people who do not have access to luxuries can avail comfort by visiting the expensive religious building. Therefore it is necessary to determine whether expensive religious buildings give all humankind equality and are in line with human rights. Get Free Custom Dissertation Topic. 
 Politics and Religion: Dissertation Topics 
 The study of religion and politics aims to draw an interconnecting relationship between the two subject areas and analyze their impact upon each other’s application. Below is a list of topics that may help aim to research the relationship between Politics and Religion. 
 Research Aim: As per secularist ideology, politics and religion are two different aspects and therefore should be clearly separated. However, religious doctrines tend to suggest that politics and religious beliefs go hand in hand. Given this argument, the present study adopts exploratory research to determine whether there must be a clear distinction between political views and religious beliefs. 
 Research Aim: Politics include various activities which are used to govern a country. In a country where the governance is controlled or influenced by religious leaders or religious parties, religious fanaticism may be accepted and cultivated under political authority. In this research, the relationship between politics and religious fanaticism is critically analyzed to identify whether politics is used as a cover to foster religious fanaticism. 
 Research Aim: secularism is a belief which segregates politics and state from religious affairs. Based on this notion, it can be argued that people tend to disassociate religion from worldly affairs in a secular state. Therefore the affiliation between religion and politics has been diminishing. In this study, the relationship between religion and politics is to be determined in a secular state to evaluate the extent to which religion is disassociated from politics. 
 Research Aim: Religious leaders have a great degree of power and influence over their religious communities, and their followers tend to obey their orders without questioning them. This shows that religious leaders can even use their position and religious authority to direct their followers wherever they want. Therefore this study focuses to critically analyze whether it would be correct to give religious leaders any political or legal authority. 
 Research Aim: In countries where religious leaders have great influence and control over many people, the politicians sometimes join hands with religious leaders to win elections by gaining support from their religious followers. However, the politicians’ collation with the religious leaders may not necessarily mean that they bow down to the religious leaders. Still, it is a diplomatic step to gain their own political authority. 
 Research Aim: In the post 9/11 world, the religion Islam came under immense political pressure. The political activism by Islamic organizations and religious parties has been restricted to moderate the religion of Islam. In this research, a critical analysis is to be conducted to determine whether religion Islam surrendered under political pressures. 
 Research Aim: In India, the Hindu extremist party RSS played a significant role in rising Hindu Nationalism in Indian politics. Since its independence, India has been identified as a secular state. Still, under the Hindu Nationalist party’s new rule, the Indian political landscape has been altered, and Hinduism dominance is forcefully implemented in Indian society. Given this, the present study aims to evaluate what impact the Hindu extremists and Hindu Nationalist politicians would have on Indian culture in terms of violence and injustice towards low-caste people and Muslims living in India. 
 Important Notes: 
 As a student of religion, philosophy and theology looking to get good grades, it is essential to develop new ideas and experiment on existing religion, philosophy and theology theories – i.e., to add value and interest in your research topic. 
 The field of religion, philosophy and theology is vast and interrelated to many other academic disciplines like civil engineering, construction, law, and even healthcare. That is why it is imperative to create a religion, philosophy and theology dissertation topic that is articular, sound, and actually solves a practical problem that may be rampant in the field. 
 We can’t stress how important it is to develop a logical research topic; it is based on your entire research. There are several significant downfalls to getting your topic wrong; your supervisor may not be interested in working on it, the topic has no academic credit-ability, the research may not make logical sense, there is a possibility that the study is not viable. 
 This impacts your time and efforts in writing your dissertation as you may end up in the cycle of rejection at the initial stage of the dissertation. That is why we recommend reviewing existing research to develop a topic, taking advice from your supervisor, and even asking for help in this particular stage of your dissertation. 
 Keeping our advice in mind while developing a research topic will allow you to pick one of the best religion, philosophy, and theology dissertation topics that fulfill your requirement of writing a research paper and adds to the body of knowledge. 
 Therefore, it is recommended that when finalizing your dissertation topic, you read recently published literature to identify gaps in the research that you may help fill. 
 Remember- dissertation topics need to be unique, solve an identified problem, be logical, and be practically implemented. Please look at some of our sample religion, philosophy and theology dissertation topics to get an idea for your own dissertation. 
 How to Structure your Dissertation 
 Introduction: This chapter includes project rationale, research background, key research aims and objectives, and the research problems. An outline of the structure of a dissertationcan also be added to this chapter. 
 Literature Review: This chapter presents relevant theories and frameworks by analyzing published and unpublished literature on the chosen research topic to address research questions. The purpose is to highlight and discuss the selected research area’s relative weaknesses and strengths while identifying any research gaps. Break down the topic and key terms that can positively impact your dissertation and your tutor. 
 Methodology:The data collection and analysis methods and techniques employed by the researcher are presented in the Methodology chapter, which usually includes research design, research philosophy, research limitations, code of conduct, ethical consideration, data collection methods and data analysis strategy. 
 Findings and Analysis:Findings of the research are analyzed in detail under the Findings and Analysis chapter. All key findings/results are outlined in this chapter without interpreting the data or drawing any conclusions. It can be useful to include graphs, charts and tables in this chapter to identify meaningful trends and relationships. 
 Discussionand Conclusion: The researcher presents his interpretation of the results in this chapter and states whether the research hypothesis has been verified or not. An essential aspect of this section is establishing the link between the results and evidence from the literature. Recommendations with regards to the implications of the findings and directions for the future may also be provided. Finally, a summary of the overall research, along with final judgments, opinions, and comments, must be included in the form of suggestions for improvement. 
 References: Make sure to complete this following your University’s requirements 
 Bibliography 
 Appendices:Any additional information, diagrams, and graphs used to complete the dissertation but not part of the dissertation should be included in the Appendices chapter. Essentially, the purpose is to expand the information/data. 
 About Research Prospect Ltd 
 Our team of writers is highly qualified and are experts in their respective fields. They have been working for us for a long time. Thus, they are well aware of the issues and the trends of the subject they specialize in. 
 LEARNING RESOURCES 
 SERVICES 
 COMPANY DETAILS 
 8am - 8pm Monday - Friday and 10am - 4pm Saturday and Sunday. 20-22 Wenlock Road, London, England, N1 7GU 

 id="file23242759" filename="religious" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.123greetings.com/events/christmas/religious/">
 Express your warm wishes to everyone you know with this beautiful Christmas ecard. 
 It is the time to rejoice with Christmas religious blessings in the glory of Christ's birth. Celebrate all the blessings of the Holy Spirit with your friends, family, acquaintances and loved ones. Reach out to them on this joyous occasion with our warm and beautiful Christmas religious blessings ecards and wish them a blessed Christmas. 
 Birthdays are never complete until you've sent happy birthday wishes to a friend or to... 
 Aren't birthdays and fun synonymous? Get the best funny birthday wishes to send to... 
 Birthday wishes definitely adds cheer on your friends' or loved ones' birthday. So go... 
 When you realize you want to spend the rest of your life with somebody, you want the... 
 Good morning ecards can really give a great start to a day. You can send a hot cup of... 
 On your son's or daughter's birthday let him or her know what a wonderful difference... 
 They are a fun couple. You really make a good foursome or if you are single, they... 
 Brothers and sisters share a special bond and therefore birthday wishes for brother or... 
 Out of sight but never out of my mind! If there is someone who is ruling your mind... 
 When two human beings are involved, strange things could happen, which is why we... 
 Please wait... 
 Please wait... 
 Subscribe to Newsletter/Offers! 
 Get a weekly dose of stories on friendship, love, misadventures and special offers. It's free, read it once and you're hooked! 

 id="file23242804" filename="religious-birth-rituals_n_56d9e2d4e4b03a40567885f5" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.huffpost.com/entry/religious-birth-rituals_n_56d9e2d4e4b03a40567885f5">
 12 Spiritual Rituals That Honor The Arrival Of A New Baby 
 The birth of a child can be an auspicious and sacred time for a family. Beliefs and rituals surrounding this important rite of passage vary from culture to culture. For instance, Hopi tradition in North America holds that a baby's true parents were the earth (as mother) and the corn plant (as father) with their human parents acting as surrogates who help to usher in the new life. 
 HuffPost Religion rounded up 12 different birth-related rituals from religious and cultural traditions. Some of those listed -- like male circumcision, feeding honey to infants and mothers eating their placentas -- are medically contested, but they nonetheless offer a glimpse into practices that religious communities have observed for centuries. 
 Did you hold any rituals at the time of your child's birth? We would love to hear about it in the comments below! 
 Before the birth 
 Ivanko_Brnjakovic via Getty Images 
 There are lots of religious and cultural ceremonies to honor women during their pregnancies. Some Hindus observe a ritual called Simantonnyana in the seventh month of pregnancy, during which prayers are recited and the mother's hair is delicately parted by her husband to put her in a calm, relaxed mood. 
 Some modern pagans hold "Blessing Way" ceremonies on the last full moon before a woman's due date. During the ritual friends gather, brush the woman's hair and wash her feet with herbs. Each woman in the circle presents the mother with a prayer or spiritual gift, before concluding with a ritual feast. 
 Burying the placenta 
 Rajeev Doshi, Medi-Mation (c) Dorling Kindersley via Getty Images 
 The placenta is an organ that develops in the uterus during pregnancy, providing essential oxygen and nutrients to the growing baby. After the baby's birth, the placenta leaves the body, having fulfilled its purpose. Although most hospitals today simply dispose of placentas after childbirth, people from different religious and cultural traditions throughout history and to this day have honored the organ's role in nourishing the fetus. These rituals included burying, eating (which today some mothers are also choosing to do outside of a religious context) or making jewelry out of the placenta. 
 In Muslim and Hindu traditions, a baby's head is typically shaved within several days or in the first three years after birth. In Islam, it is done to show that the child is a servant of Allah. In Hinduism, the ceremony, called a mundan, is believed to rid the baby of negativity from their past life and cleanse the child's body and soul. Some Hindus in India take the baby's hair to scatter in the holy river Ganges, while some Muslims weigh it and donate the equivalent weight in silver to charity. 
 Circumcision 
 Dan Porges via Getty Images 
 Male circumcision, called B'rit Milah in Judaism, is a ceremony and surgical operation in which the foreskin is removed from the penis of an 8-day old baby. Circumcision is also practiced in Islam and Christianity, though it is only considered a religious requirement in Judaism. The tradition stems from Genesis 17, in which God commands Abraham: “Every male among you shall be circumcised. You shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and that shall be the sign of the covenant between Me and you. At the age of eight days, every male among you throughout the generations shall be circumcised, even the homeborn slave... An uncircumcised male... has broken My covenant.  
 Baptism 
 IRYNA KAZLOVA via Getty Images 
 Baptisms, or rituals involving the literal or symbolic immersion in water, take place in several religious traditions and at different points in a person's life. Baptism of infants is common practice in Catholicism and viewed as a way of cleansing the child of "original sin." During the baptism, the priest pours water over the child's head, or sprinkles a few drops on their forehead, while reciting the Trinitarian invocation, “I baptize you: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.  
 Ear piercing 
 szefei via Getty Images 
 Some Hindus choose to have their baby's ears pierced in a ritual called Karnavedha. Some believe that the pierced ears help ward off evil, while other believe the ear lobe is a vital acupuncture point and that piercing it may have a therapeutic value. The ceremony typically takes place within the first or third year after birth and may be done simultaneously with the mundan, or head shaving, ritual. 
 Godparents 
 Creatas via Getty Images 
 The tradition of inviting adult members of the family or community to serve as godparents for a child is found in several religious and cultural traditions around the world, but most prominently in Catholicism. The chosen godparent typically holds the baby during their baptism ceremony. As Jesuit priest, Rev. James Martin, explained to The Huffington Post, “The question asked in the Catholic sacrament of baptism is a good one: ‘Are you ready to help the parents of this child in their duty as Christian parents?’ So it's less an honor given to a friend, or a kind of ‘reward’ for a relative, than an important duty asked of a trusted faithful person." 
 First words 
 yuliang11 
 Muslims believe that the adhan, or call to prayer ("God is great, there is no God but Allah. Muhammad is the messenger of Allah. Come to prayer.") should be the first words a newborn baby hears. The prayer is typically whispered into the right ear of the child by his or her father. 
 Family shrine 
 Marvin Fox via Getty Images 
 In Shinto tradition, parents and grandparents take the baby to visit their family shrine, a local place of worship, within 30 to 100 days after birth as a way of welcoming them as a new adherent. The ceremony is called a miyamairi and is viewed as an opportunity to present the baby to the deities and ask for their protection on behalf of the child. 
 Introduction to community 
 Michael Wheatley via Getty Images 
 Sikhs frequently welcome new babies into their communities with great fanfare. Parents visit their local gurdwara, or temple, with the baby as soon as possible following the birth, typically within forty days. At the temple, a priest opens the Guru Granth Sahib, the holy book of the Sikh faith, to a random page and reads a passage aloud. The family chooses a name by using the first letter of the hymn on the page opened. The baby's name is then announced to the congregation. Afterward, a sweet dish made from flour, semolina, butter and sugar is distributed among the congregation as a celebratory treat. 
 Something sweet 
 Magone via Getty Images 
 Many Hindu and Muslim communities believe that an infant's first taste should be something sweet "so that the baby speaks sweetly," as one Bangladeshi patient told researchers. In Islam, this is done by rubbing either a softened date or a bit of honey into the baby's upper palate. Hindus typically use honey exclusively for the ritual, called Jatakarma. 
 Naming ceremonies 
 ImagesBazaar via Getty Images 
 Many religious and cultural traditions have some form of ceremony surrounding the naming of a newborn. After all, everyone has to have a name, and names often carry spiritual significance. In Judaism, baby's are often given both Hebrew and secular names. During the ceremony, the parents announce the name and its significance to them, and blessings are said to acknowledge that the child has entered into a covenant with God. Ashkenazic Jews, those of European ancestry, typically select a name to commemorate a deceased relative. Sephardic Jews, those of Spanish and Middle Eastern ancestry, often name their children after living relatives. 

 id="file23242769" filename="religious-discrimination-bill-does-blessing-law-give-us-right-discriminate" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://newsroom.unsw.edu.au/news/business-law/religious-discrimination-bill-does-blessing-law-give-us-right-discriminate">
 Religious discrimination bill: Does the blessing of the law give us the right to discriminate? 
 Despite Australia’s long history of a secular government, this bill might create a future that segregates people based on their faith and beliefs. 
 Legal experts say the religious discrimination bill has the potential to legitimise discrimination against vulnerable groups. Photo: Shutterstock 
 The religious discrimination bill tabled in Parliament last week by Prime Minister Scott Morrison is designed to make “statements of belief  immune to anti-discrimination laws. But while the intention is to protect people against discrimination based on their religious belief, many legal experts see this bill doing more harm than good. 
 Is the religious discrimination bill creating space for more discrimination? 
 As drafted, UNSW law and health ethics experts agree the religious discrimination bill could potentially undermine existing protections for groups that are already vulnerable to discrimination. 
 "This includes LGBTIQ+ people, women, people with disabilities, migrants, and ironically, other people of faith, that one’s own faith does not agree with," says Dr Andy Kaladelfos, whose expertise is in queer criminology and immigration regulation. 
 The bill is the third version of a law promised by the Coalition government during the marriage-equality debate. 
 “If this federal bill is enacted into law, it will potentially override existing anti-discrimination legislation, and any state and territory rights protections to historically disadvantaged groups,  says Professor Lucas Lixinski, international human rights law expert at UNSW Sydney. 
 Rather than simply protecting people from being discriminated against on the basis of their faith, this bill has the potential to allow people to discriminate if it accords with their religious views. 
 Public health ethics expert Dr Bridget Haire says “the religious discrimination bill essentially creates a right to discriminate, disguised as the right to freedom of religion – which is an important right protected by most constitutions around the world . 
 In Australia, however, the protection to freedom of religion that exists comes from the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, an international law which Australia accepted back in 1980 and still accepts. This treaty protects the right to freedom of religion, Prof. Lixinski says. 
 But it is very clear that the right to freedom of religion is not absolute: one of its limits is the rights of others. 
 “The right to discriminate against others would clearly constitute an infringement on the rights of minorities,  he says. 
 What does “good faith  actually mean? 
 Discriminatory practices held by some religions might be encouraged due to the broad way that the bill was written. 
 If enacted, this bill will heavily rely on people’s interpretation of the law. For example, it is said that the law will provide that making a statement of belief “in good faith  will not be considered discriminatory under any Australian anti-discrimination law. But what is considered “in good faith  in the eyes of the law? 
 “Good faith  is an incredibly open-ended and subjective standard, Prof. Lixinski says. 
 One way of making it objective is to measure it against what is “reasonable  or what an “average  person would normally do. 
 “But many judges tend to interpret “good faith  as a window to gaze into the intentions of the specific person, and, because it is very hard to prove what the person felt or meant subjectively, the law ends up taking their word at face value,  Prof. Lixinski says. 
 Put simply, if applied subjectively, “good faith  creates an excuse for anyone to say anything, he says, and if they get in trouble, they can just say they “meant it well . 
 According to Dr Haire, it could also mean a genuine belief that a statement is in accordance with their religious views. 
 “Given some religious teachings, this could include statements that same-sex relationships are sinful, that single parent families are sinful, that women should be relegated to the domestic sphere and obey their husbands, that certain illnesses or disabilities are a curse from god, and so on,  she says. 
 Is it possible to encourage rights protections in the absence of this bill? 
 It is possible but the first version of this bill came directly as a response to the marriage equality legislation, Prof. Lixinski says. 
 “It is a classic move: when a minority gains rights, the majority who perceives themselves to be threatened tries to find a way to claw back and put said minority “back in their place , even if there is no actual threat (like here). There is no compelling evidence that there is a problem with insufficient protection of freedom of religion in this country, so the bill is not justified,  he says. 
 So, if there is a need to protect religious freedoms, why can’t the government just amend existing legislation to include religious freedom as a protected characteristic? 
 According to the Ruddock review, there were no substantial issues with religious freedom and therefore there's no necessity to create specific religious discrimination protections such as this bill, Dr Kaladelfos says. 
 “It is everyone’s responsibility to protect and encourage rights protections for all. I would suggest that a positive liberty approach to this is best – ensuring that workplaces cater for people’s genuine religious practices by having prayer rooms and ensuring that holy days can be appropriately observed regardless of the faith practiced,  Dr Haire says. 
 Should schools be allowed to "discriminate" based on religion? 
 Prof. Lixinski says the government has a mandate to allow people to live without fear of persecution or discrimination. 
 “To allow people to live without fear is just part of being a responsible citizen, and people of faith still have to make a case about why their fear of simply being in the same room as an LGBTIQ+ person, or a woman, or a disabled person, is greater than that person’s fear of losing their livelihoods,  he says. 
 Drawing comparisons to the vaccine passport bill, Prof. Lixinski says that the government has a duty to ensure that people feel safe leaving their homes in the face of contagious and ill-founded fear and hate, just like ensuring people’s safety in a pandemic. 
 If enacted, this bill will allow faith-based employers — such as schools, hospitals and aged-care providers — to “discriminate  against employees who are not of the same religious belief or sexual identity. 
 “This bill will clearly allow religious schools, hospitals and aged care facilities to discriminate in their hiring policies,  Dr Haire says. “This is manifestly unfair, and antithetical to egalitarian values. It is also highly problematic given that these institutions also get public funding.  
 So, despite Australia’s preference of a secular government, this bill might create a future that segregates people based on their faith and beliefs. 
 “In most countries, the right to discriminate would fly in the face of the basic concept of freedom of religion, because the ability to discriminate affects the rights of others. For the belief to be protected, it needs to be an important part of the faith. 
 “So, I do not believe any faith person would openly say that the right to hate or discriminate against someone outside of their faith is an essential part of their belief system, but the bill allows them to behave this way without having to spell it out,  Prof. Lixinski says. 

 id="file23242848" filename="religious-studies-vs-theology" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.northcentralcollege.edu/news/2021/08/27/religious-studies-vs-theology">
 Coronavirus (COVID-19) Updates 
 This website will regularly be updated with the latest information regarding the College’s response to the global coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. 
 Pay Your Deposit 
 Religious Studies vs Theology 
 Reviewed by Jacob Imm 
 Aug 27, 2021 
 Religious Studies vs. Theology 
 Although theology can be an aspect of religious studies and religious studies can be an aspect of theology, these college degrees are distinct in important ways. Whereas religious studies programs explore major world religions, such as Christianity, Judaism and Buddhism, theology maintains a more singular focus on the study of God. 
 But the core focus of these programs isn’t the only major difference. Keep reading to learn more about religious studies vs. theology to determine whether a degree in religious studies or theology is right for you. 
 What Is Religious Studies? 
 Over time, cultures develop their own internal sets of values, morality and theories about humankind’s relationships with the Divine and one another. These philosophies are simultaneously ancient and yet vibrantly alive to this day. 
 But this academic pursuit doesn’t simply focus on the religions themselves. 
 It also covers the foundational scholars who studied religious dogma and developed philosophies out of their findings. This allows you to trace the impact such thoughts had on human notions about morality, human rights, law, and gender relations. From there, you can see how such ideas evolve and change over time. 
 Through comprehensive coursework, students can gain a deeper understanding of the continuous impact these religions have had in a number of areas, including but not limited to: 
 Anthropology 
 Diverse cultures 
 Sociology 
 By investigating religion, you can gain a better understanding of the underlying motivations for human behavior and our shared history. 
 What Does a Religious Studies Major Cover? 
 Religious studies coursework will vary depending on the school. At North Central College, for example, religious studies majors begin with introductory courses on the major world religions. From there, students have the freedom to select courses from each of the following areas: 
 Biblical studies – Introduces the Bible, both the New and Old Testaments. 
 Theology – Focuses on understanding the nature of a divine creator and the ontological arguments for a creator’s existence. 
 Ethics – Studies the concepts of morality, right and wrong, and the codes civilization has developed surrounding such notions. 
 Asian traditions – Covers the three primary philosophies springing from India, China and Japan. 
 How Long Does it Take to Earn a Degree in Religious Studies? 
 Degree requirements vary from school to school, but at some institutions students can earn a bachelor’s degree in religious studies within four years. At North Central College, students are required to take the following courses to graduate: 
 A minimum of 32 credit hours of religion courses 
 A minimum of 10 credit hours of religious electives 
 During this time, students may also be required to take classes in philosophy, literature, history and foreign language. 
 Those looking to pursue a master’s degree in religious studies will typically need an additional 1-3 years of education. Religious studies majors who want to earn a doctorate in their field (a goal that 67% of religious workers pursue) will need to dedicate another four years (on average) to their coursework and dissertation. 
 If you’re interested in entering a graduate school for religious studies, North Central College offers a master’s degree program in partnership with Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary (GETS). This means that North Central undergrad students are eligible to take graduate-level classes that can count either toward their electives or a future master’s degree—whether at GETS or elsewhere. 
 Career Paths with a Degree in Religious Studies 
 What can you do with a religious studies degree? Religious studies investigates the fundamental aspects of human society, culture and history. It forces students to think, debate and communicate persuasively. And it prepares young people to have a deeper understanding of the world’s religions and cultures. As a result, it paves the way for several different career branches, including: 
 Education – Whether it’s teaching at a religious or secular school, the in-depth knowledge of history and global studies adequately prepares religious studies majors to teach younger students. It also opens up the possibility of obtaining an advanced degree to teach at a collegiate level or pursue a career in research. 
 Law – Robust critical thinking and communication skills open up the legal world to students interested in law. Lawyers have the freedom to focus their practice as they choose—be it on religious freedom or general legal principles. 
 Religion – Some students that enter religious studies have plans to join the ministry or become a religious leader. Often, religious studies is a precursor to graduate-level religious studies in a seminary school. 
 Social work – This field allows religious studies majors to put their knowledge to work. Students can focus on addressing specific issues, making positive changes in society and impacting people’s lives on a personal level. 
 Nonprofits – Many of the world’s largest nonprofit organizations are religious-based and seek to influence the world for the better. 
 What Is Theology? 
 Theology is the systematic study of God. It derives from the Greek words theos (God) and logos (knowledge). 
 In his book “Institutes of the Christian Religion,  the widely known theologian John Calvin put it, “Nearly all the wisdom we possess, that is to say, true and sound wisdom, consists of two parts: the knowledge of God and of ourselves.  To Calvin, the pursuit of theology was the same thing as the pursuit of wisdom. According to his worldview, understanding theology is not only important for grasping the divine nature of a creator, but also for understanding humanity’s place in a universe that’s created by God. 
 Theological studies is more closely related to the rigorous training of spiritual leaders and thinkers within specific religious traditions—whether they take place in a seminary, monastery, semikhah or elsewhere. That said, theology is often closely tied to the Judeo-Christian religions; as a result, there’s a greater emphasis on using religious studies as a vehicle to pursue a personal faith or belief and develop one’s relationship with God. 
 Although theology takes a much more intensive dive into Old and New Testament scriptures, it’s similar to religious studies in that it also focuses on a variety of related fields, including: 
 Anthropology 
 Archeology 
 Philosophy 
 Religious studies differs from theology in that religion functions more as a backdrop than a central tenet of personal faith. Religious studies is broader, more focused on learning about all world religions as opposed to one. Therefore, it tends to be more analytical and objective while comparing and contrasting various religious faith and their practices in terms of their impact on the world. 
 How Long Does it Take to Earn a Degree in Theology? And What Can You Do With It? 
 A bachelor’s degree—the most common degree earned by those with careers related to theology—usually requires four years of study at most undergraduate institutions. However, many who opt for an emphasis on theology do so as preparation for divinity school. There, they can dive deeper into the pursuit of the divine while obtaining a master’s or doctorate in theology. In most cases, it takes about 3-4 years to complete divinity school. 
 Those who graduate with such degrees often follow one of a few select career paths: 
 Ministers and pastors 
 Guidance and marriage counselors 
 Historians 
 Do You Have to Be Religious to Study Theology? 
 Although you do not have to be religious to study theology, your should be prepared to spend a lot of time discussing, researching and wrestling with the fundamental nature of God. There’s a greater emphasis in theology than in religious studies on how the union of the philosophical schools of thought, deriving from Athens and Jerusalem, impacted the development of Christianity as well as Western society and philosophy. 
 The roots of theology are in Christians seeking to understand their God. But that’s not always how the subject is approached. As Paul Badham, professor emeritus of theology and religious studies at the University of Wales notes, “Theologians tend to fall into these two categories. Some are studying theology because they wish to move from faith to a fuller understanding of that faith. Others are studying theology because they want to understand what it is that Christians believe.  (Sagepub Journals) 
 That said, even if you are non-religious, studying theology opens up a world of fascinating philosophical discussions. 
 Students can wrestle with religious topics that have been debated for millennia by some of the world’s greatest minds, such as theodicy—the question of why a good Omnipotent God would allow evil things to occur. Just this single issue alone opens up a world of philosophical study since there are compelling arguments from the Plotinian, Augustinian and Irenaean schools of thought. 
 What to Think About When Considering a Degree in Religious Studies vs. Theology 
 Are you interested in the analytical pursuit of world religions and a better understanding of how they’ve impacted world history to this day? If so, religious studies is likely a more suitable major for you. 
 However, if you have a personal faith or belief, and wish to dive deeper into the philosophies underpinning both Judaism and Christianity, then a theological focus is probably more in line with your interests. 
 Fortunately, schools like North Central College offer students the opportunity to broadly study world religions via religious studies or to specialize in theological studies. Find out more about North Central and get started on the path to your degree today. 
 Sources: 
 2021 Religious Studies Degree Guide | Find Your Future Faster. (2021). College Factual. 
 North Central creates formal partnership with Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary. (2019, October 30). North Central College. 
 Calvin’s Theology: Nearly All the Wisdom We Possess. (2017, September 17). Place For Truth. 

 id="file23242789" filename="replacement-theology.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.compellingtruth.org/replacement-theology.html">
 What is replacement theology? 
 At Pentecost, the Holy Spirit came upon the followers of Jesus with the sound of a violent, rushing wind and the appearance of tongues of fire. In the ensuing years, the alteration of the worship of God was no less dynamic for the Jews who had chosen to follow Jesus as their Messiah. Christ caused an upheaval in their worldview. The Jewish believers no longer relied on the daily sacrifices for the forgiveness of their sins, and they learned to think of God as Someone whom they could speak to directly, bypassing the system of priesthood. They also had to deal with the steady influx of Gentiles into the church, which challenged their Jewish sensibilities. The Jews, who had always been God's chosen people (Deuteronomy 14:2), now faced the fact that God was choosing people from all nations, ethnicities, and religious backgrounds. 
 The crucial first-century transition from Judaism to Christianity was so significant that we are still debating its ramifications. Specifically, if God is now relating to the world through the church instead of through the nation of Israel, what does that mean for Israel? Is this a temporary condition, as the dispensationalists believe, or is God really and completely done with the Jews as a nation? 
 The latter belief is called "replacement theology." It teaches that the church has replaced Israel in God's plans, prophecies, and blessings. The roles of Israel and the church are foundational to the events of the end times; what one believes about replacement theology largely determines what one believes about the rapture, the tribulation, and the millennial kingdom, not to mention the role of the church in modern society. 
 A couple of practical matters led to the formation of replacement theology. One was that, for 2,400 years, from their exile to Babylon to the formation of Israel in modern times, Jews did not have a sovereign nation. And, after the destruction of Jerusalem in AD 70, Jews were largely spread throughout the world. Another matter was the increasing wealth, advancement, and global reach of Christian sects and "Christian" nations. All this seemed to indicate God's abandonment of Israel and His focus on the church. Anti-Semitism also played a role. As the church emphasized the rejection of Jesus by the Jews, some Gentile believers adopted the common pagan belief that Jews are religiously backward and socially unapproachable. 
 Replacement theology is not based on a literal interpretation of the Bible. As the Bible uses metaphor (no one really expects God to send all the goats of the world to hell, as Matthew 25:31-33 allegorizes), some theologians concluded that much unfulfilled prophecy must have also been intended as metaphor—the promises made to Israel were really meant for the church. Once this simple "explanation" was made, large portions of the Bible became open to personal interpretation. 
 The Bible is filled with prophecies promising peace and wealth to Israel, and a great many are still unfulfilled, including a promise detailing specific borders (Genesis 15:18-20; Numbers 34:1-12), a promise of a King from the line of David (2 Samuel 7), and a promise that Israel would one day be wholly devoted to God (Jeremiah 31:31-34). Given the continued non-existence of a Jewish state and the success of Christian-led endeavors, it was difficult to see how such prophecies would ever be fulfilled. Some assumed they would be more easily and completely fulfilled through the church than through the Jewish people, and replacement theology was born. 
 In order to shift prophecy to the church, several specific promises must be "spiritualized" or "allegorized," that is, reinterpreted non-literally. Abraham's descendants beyond counting (Genesis 22:17) become all Christ-followers, not literal biological descendants. The literal 1,000-year reign of Christ (Revelation 20:1-6) becomes symbolic, either referencing the saints in heaven or the reign of Jesus in believers' hearts. 
 Allegorizing such a foundational concept as the subject of prophecy opens up many more issues. If the millennial kingdom is for the church, when will the rapture occur? If the prophecies of peace are for the church (Isaiah 32:18), should the church enforce peace in international affairs? If God's plan is for the church to lead (Isaiah 2:2), should the church take over politics? Replacement theology has several consequent beliefs: 
 - Amillennialism: The belief that the millennial kingdom is not literal, that it began at Christ's resurrection and is manifest either in the hearts of saints in heaven or saints on earth. - Postmillennialism: The belief that the church is responsible for arranging the "golden age" of Christ's rule in people's hearts, resulting in godly overtones in politics, entertainment, family, and social life. - Dominionism: Similar to postmillennialism but more extreme; the belief that the church is responsible for reinstating the Old Testament laws in all of the world's governments and societies. 
 As witnesses to the re-establishment of a Jewish state in 1948, we have an advantage over those earlier theologians; we've seen God's power in action to set the stage for a more literal interpretation of prophecy. This event, combined with a careful study of biblical prophecy, shows that the church was never designed to take the place of Israel. 
 First of all, the church is not a punishment on Israel for their failure to spread the gospel. It is God's work to draw Jews to Him (Romans 11:11). Daniel 9:20-27 is clear that God's plan for Israel is to last seventy "weeks" or 490 years, starting at the time of a decree to rebuild Jerusalem. Verses 25 and 26 suggest a significant event at the sixty-nine "week" mark—the point of the crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus. It also allows for a break before the arrival of the seventieth week—this space of time has been manifested as the church age. As this prophecy is for Daniel's people (vs. 24), the church era is not mentioned. Instead, the prophecy skips ahead to the last "week"—the tribulation. Before the tribulation is the rapture, which marks the removal of the church—and the re-establishing of God's work with Israel. 
 Paul, in a letter written primarily to Gentiles, explicitly states that God is not finished with Israel. Romans 11:12 says that if Israel's rejection of Jesus is a blessing for the Gentiles, the restoration of Israel will be more so. Romans 11:25-26 goes on to say, "Lest you be wise in your own sight, I do not want you to be unaware of this mystery, brothers: a partial hardening has come upon Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles has come in. And in this way all Israel will be saved, as it is written, 'The Deliverer will come from Zion, he will banish ungodliness from Jacob'" (cf. Daniel 9:24). As the previous verses clearly delineate Jews and Gentiles, there is no way that this prophecy can be applied to the church. 
 The more literal interpretation of God's plan for humanity is called "dispensationalism." Instead of the church replacing Israel, dispensationalism teaches that the Bible shows God working in very specific dispensations throughout history. The previous dispensation focused on Israel and the law. The current one on the church and grace. In "the fullness of time" (Ephesians 1:10), the next dispensation will begin. The church will be removed (1 Thessalonians 4:13-18), Israel will be sanctified (Daniel 9:24), and the prophecies made to both Israel (Genesis 15:18-20; Jeremiah 31:31-34; Isaiah 11:6-9) and the church (Revelation 20:1-5) will be fulfilled in Jesus' literal millennial kingdom. 
 The problem with replacement theology is that it relies on the judgment and effort of man instead of the Word and power of God. Two hundred years ago, the idea of a restored Jewish state was incredible. Today, the Jewish state is a fact. Having such gracious proof of God's sovereignty, we should be greatly exhorted to read the Bible as literally as it was written. God has given the church specific blessings and responsibilities. We should concentrate on these and reject the allegorical interpretations of replacement theology. 

 id="file23242748" filename="retribution-theology.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.compellingtruth.org/retribution-theology.html">
 What does retribution theology teach? Is it biblical? 
 Retribution theology holds that people are treated by God based on how they behave. If you have cancer, it's because of God's punishment for your misdeeds. If you become wealthy, it's because you please God. This simplistic interpretation of our relationship with God is not based in the truth of the Bible. 
 Jesus addressed this mistaken idea several times. In John 9, His disciples asked about who sinned to cause a man to be born blind. Jesus told them it was not because of the sin of the man or his parents, but for purposes God had to glorify His Son. 
 At another time, He referenced the tragic death of more than a dozen people to make the point that circumstances are not a good indication of God's punishment. "'Or those eighteen on whom the tower in Siloam fell and killed them: do you think that they were worse offenders than all the others who lived in Jerusalem? No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise perish.'" 
 In the lives of Job and of Paul, we see men who pleased God suffer greatly. We also see in Scripture wicked people escape immediate punishment such as the evil King Ahab of Samaria who reigned in luxury for 22 years while clearly doing evil (1 Kings 16:29–34). Psalm 94:3 asks, "O Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked exult?" 
 With our sense of right and wrong tied with our desire for immediate justice, we want God to immediately set things right. However, Romans 3:23 teaches us that every person has sinned and deserves death. We can be thankful that our own actions don't receive swift justice. 
 The Bible teaches a long-term justice and that God will address evil people rightly (Micah 5:15; Matthew 3:7; John 5:21–29). There is, clearly, a final judgement that will result in retribution (Isaiah 1:24; Revelation 20:11–15). 
 Some see in the blessings and curses outlined in Proverbs evidence of retribution theology. Proverbs 3:33 says, "The Lord's curse is on the house of the wicked, but he blesses the dwelling of the righteous." And, in Proverbs 13:25, the writer says. "The righteous has enough to satisfy his appetite, but the belly of the wicked suffers want." However, Proverbs give us general wisdom about how to live life, rather than make promises about the results of our actions. Therein lies an important difference. Practical, common sense underlies godly living and will result, sometimes, in good returns. Of course, we see in our own lives, and the lives of some in the Bible such as Daniel and Jeremiah, that righteous living sometimes results in terrible circumstances. What did Joseph do to deserve slavery and imprisonment? 
 In the Mosaic Law, there are many curses and blessings attached to the behavior God expected from His people. For example, Deuteronomy 30:16–18 says, "If you obey the commandments of the Lord your God that I command you today, by loving the Lord your God, by walking in his ways, and by keeping his commandments and his statutes and his rules, then you shall live and multiply, and the Lord your God will bless you in the land that you are entering to take possession of it. But if your heart turns away, and you will not hear, but are drawn away to worship other gods and serve them, I declare to you today, that you shall surely perish. You shall not live long in the land that you are going over the Jordan to enter and possess." This system, or covenant, was established by God for Israel's theocracy and when people were disobedient, they were punished. Sometimes the punishment came right away (Numbers 11:33) and sometimes later (Psalm 35:17). We, as those living in grace, should remember that this system was for those living under the law. 
 As for Job, his friend Eliphaz charged that Job must be suffering due to some sin he was being punished for (Job 4:7–9). Job's other friends, Bildad and Zophar, conclude the same in Job 8:6 and Job 20:27–29. However, in Job 42:7, the truth about God and Job is revealed. "After the Lord had spoken these words to Job, the Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite: 'My anger burns against you and against your two friends, for you have not spoken of me what is right, as my servant Job has.'" 
 Acts 28:4 shows us that some people in Paul's day also believed in retribution theology when they assumed Paul was bit by a snake due to some sort of cosmic justice. Moments later when Paul failed to die from the bite as expected, they wanted to worship him as some sort of god. 
 God doesn't perch at the edge of heaven looking for opportunities to punish and reward those who are acting wicked or righteous, but be sure that His character includes justice and retribution will occur (Revelation 22:12). Trust Him to always do what is right (Genesis 18:25). 

 id="file23242585" filename="Rite-for-the-Blessing-of-a-Child-in-the-Womb.pdf" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.usccb.org/about/pro-life-activities/prayers/upload/Rite-for-the-Blessing-of-a-Child-in-the-Womb.pdf">
Rite for the Blessing of a
Child in the Womb

Rito de Bendición
de una Criatura en el
Vientre Materno

Rite for the Blessing of a
Child in the Womb
Rito de Bendición
de una Criatura en el
Vientre Materno

United States Conference of Catholic Bishops
Washington, DC

Concordat cum originali:
X Gregory M. Aymond
Chairman, USCCB Committee on Divine Worship
after review by Rev. Msgr. Richard B. Hilgartner
Executive Director, USCCB Secretariat of Divine Worship
Published by authority of the Committee on Divine Worship,
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops

Excerpt from the Lectionary for Mass for Use in the Dioceses of the United States of
America, second typical edition © 2001, 1998, 1997, 1986, 1970 Confraternity
of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, DC. Used with permission. All rights
reserved. No portion of this text may be reproduced by any means without
permission in writing from the copyright owner.
ISBN 978-1-60137-316-8
First printing, May 2012
Copyright © 2012, United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, Washington,
DC. All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the copyright holder.

Concordat cum originali:
X Gregory M. Aymond
Presidente, Comité para el Culto Divino de USCCB
después de la revisión por el Rev. Mons. Richard B. Hilgartner
Director Ejecutivo, Secretariado del Culto Divino de USCCB
Publicado por la autoridad del Comité para el Culto Divino,
Conferencia de Obispos Católicos de los Estados Unidos

Los textos de la Sagrada Escritura utilizados en esta obra han sido tomados de los
Leccionarios I, II y III, propiedad de la Comisión Episcopal de Pastoral Litúrgica
de la Conferencia Episcopal Mexicana, copyright © 1987, quinta edición de
setiembre de 2004. Utilizados con permiso. Todos los derechos reservados.
Primera impresión, mayo de 2012
Copyright © 2012, United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, Washington,
DC. Se reservan todos los derechos. Ninguna porción de este trabajo puede
reproducirse o ser transmitida en forma o medio alguno, ya sea electrónico
o mecánico, incluyendo fotocopias, grabaciones, o por cualquier sistema de
recuperación y almacenaje de información, sin el permiso por escrito del
propietario de los derechos.

Contents
Decree of Confirmation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Decree of Publication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Rite for the Blessing of a Child
in the Womb. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Introduction.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
A. Rite for the Blessing of a Child
in the Womb within Mass.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
B. Rite for the Blessing of a Child
in the Womb outside Mass.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Appendix: Prayer of Blessing when Two or
More Expectant Mothers are Present.. . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 0

Índice
Decreto de confirmación .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 2
Decreto de publicación .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 3
Rito de bendición de una criatura
en el vientre materno.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 4
Introducción.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 4
A. Rito de bendición de una criatura en el
vientre materno dentro de la Misa. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 4
B. Rito de bendición de una criatura en el
vientre materno fuera de la Misa.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 1
Apéndice: Oración de bendición cuando estén
presentes varias madres en cinta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2

CONGREGATION FOR DIVINE WORSHIP
AND THE DISCIPLINE OF THE SACRAMENTS

Prot. n. 1422/08/L

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
At the request of His Eminence Francis Eugene Cardinal George, Archbishop of
Chicago, at the time President of the Conference of Bishops of the United States
of America, in a letter dated December 12, 2008, and by virtue of the faculty
granted to this Congregation by the Supreme Pontiff Benedict XVI, we gladly
approve and confirm the English text of the Rite for the Blessing of a Child in the
Womb, as found in the attached copy.
All things to the contrary notwithstanding.
From the offices of the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of
the Sacraments, December 8, 2011.

Antonio Card. Cañizares Llovera
Prefect

X Joseph Augustine Di Noia, OP
Archbishop-Secretary

UNITED STATES CONFERENCE OF CATHOLIC BISHOPS
DECREE OF PUBLICATION
In accord with the norms established by decree of the Sacred Congregation of
Rites in Cum, nostra ætate (January 27, 1966) and of the Congregation for Divine
Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments in Liturgiam authenticam (March
28, 2001), the Rite for the Blessing of a Child in the Womb/Rito de bendición de una
criatura en el vientre materno is declared to be a part of both the Book of Blessings
and Bendicional for use in the Dioceses of the United States of America, and is
published by authority of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops.
The Rite for the Blessing of a Child in the Womb/Rito de bendición de una criatura en el
vientre materno was canonically approved for use by the United States Conference
of Catholic Bishops on November 11, 2008, and was subsequently confirmed in
English by the Apostolic See by decree of the Congregation for Divine Worship
and the Discipline of the Sacraments on December 8, 2011 (Prot. n. 1422/08/L),
and in Spanish by decree of the same Congregation on March 1, 2012 (Prot. n.
125/12/L).
From this date, the Rite for the Blessing of a Child in the Womb/Rito de bendición de
una criatura en el vientre materno may be used in the liturgy in the Dioceses of the
United States of America.
Given at the General Secretariat of the United States Conference of Catholic
Bishops, Washington, D.C., on March 26, 2012, the Solemnity of the
Annunciation of the Lord.
Timothy Cardinal Dolan
Archbishop of New York
President, United States Conference of Catholic Bishops
Reverend Monsignor Ronny E. Jenkins
General Secretary

• BLESSING WITHIN MASS •

Rite for the Blessing of a
Child in the Womb
Introduction
1. The Church welcomes with joy and compassion the mothers who, recognizing that all life is a gift from God, come to
the Church seeking a blessing for their unborn child. Such a
blessing sustains the parents by imparting grace and comfort
in time of concern and need, unites the parish in prayer for the
unborn child, and fosters respect for human life within society. The blessing may be given by the Priest Celebrant within
Mass, using the rites of blessing provided in nos. 3-9, or as a
blessing outside Mass, celebrated by a Priest or, in his absence,
by a Deacon, according to the rites given in nos. 10-22.
2. This Rite may be used for the blessing of an individual
mother or of both the mother and the father, or on the occasion of a gathering of expectant parents.

A. Rite for the Blessing of a Child in the
Womb within Mass
3. The readings in the Liturgy of the Word are taken from
the Lectionary for Mass for use in the Dioceses of the United
States of America. Depending on what is indicated by the
rubrics, the readings used are those of the day or may be taken
from the section for Masses and Prayers for Various Needs
and Occasions.

3

• BLESSING WITHIN MASS •

4. The homily follows the proclamation of the Gospel. In
it, the Priest or Deacon, basing himself on the sacred text,
gives an appropriate explanation of the grace and mystery of
human life.
Universal Prayer (Prayer of the Faithful)
5. The Prayer of the Faithful follows, either in the form used at
Mass or in the form provided here. From the following intentions those most appropriate for the occasion may be used, or
other appropriate intentions may be composed.
Priest:

We commend our cares and concerns to our
heavenly Father through his Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ, as we say:
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.
Deacon or Reader:

For our Holy Father, Pope N., for our Bishop N.,
and for all those who have dedicated their lives
to the service of God’s people, that they may be
faithful to the vocation they have received, we pray
to the Lord.
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.
For our civic leaders, that performing their duties
with justice and compassion, they may respect the
gift of human life, we pray to the Lord.
4

• BLESSING WITHIN MASS •

R/. Lord, hear our prayer.
For all expectant mothers, that as they await
the birth of their children they may experience
tranquility and good health, and safely deliver
their children, we pray to the Lord.
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.
For all families, that they may grow in their faith,
strengthened in their love for one another and in
their commitment to follow Christ, we pray to the
Lord.
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.
For children who are unwanted, unloved,
abandoned, or abused, that the Lord may inspire
his people with compassion and courage to protect
and care for them, we pray to the Lord.
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.
For all those for whom we pray in our personal
intentions, that they may receive the graces they
need, we pray to the Lord.
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.

5

• BLESSING WITHIN MASS •

For the faithful departed, that they may enjoy in
heaven the vision of God promised to all his sons
and daughters, we pray to the Lord.
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.
Prayer of Blessing
6. If appropriate, the mother is invited to come forward,
along with the father and other family members. With hands
extended, the Priest concludes the intercessions by blessing
the child in the womb and all those present, in these words.

God, author of all life,
bless, we pray, this unborn child;
give constant protection
and grant a healthy birth
that is the sign of our rebirth one day
into the eternal rejoicing of heaven.
Lord, who have brought to this woman
the wondrous joy of motherhood,
grant her comfort in all anxiety
and make her determined
to lead her child along the ways of salvation.
[For the father:

Lord of the ages,
who have singled out this man
to know the grace and pride of fatherhood,
grant him courage in this new responsibility,

6

• BLESSING WITHIN MASS •

and make him an example of justice and truth for
this child.]
[For the family:

Lord, endow this family
with sincere and enduring love
as they prepare to welcome this child into
their midst.]
Lord, you have put into the hearts of all men and
women of good will
a great awe and wonder at the gift of new life;
fill this (parish) community
with faithfulness to the teachings of the Gospel
and new resolve to share
in the spiritual formation of this child in Christ
our Savior,
who lives and reigns for ever and ever.
R/. Amen.
The prayer of blessing in the plural is included as an appendix to the Rite, for occasions in which more than one expectant mother is present.
7. If appropriate, the Priest, in silence, may sprinkle the parents of the unborn and any other family members present
with holy water.
8. In the Liturgy of the Eucharist the Order of Mass as printed
in the Missal is observed. If appropriate, some of the faithful bring forward bread and wine for the celebration of the

7

• BLESSING WITHIN MASS •

Eucharist and perhaps other gifts to relieve the needs of families in difficulty.
9. At the end of Mass, the Priest blesses those present in the
usual manner, or with a more solemn formula of blessing,
either from the Missal or with the following:
The Deacon or, in his absence, the Priest himself, says the
invitation:

Bow down for the blessing.
Then the Priest, with hands extended over the people, says:

May God, the source of all life,
protect you by his goodness.
R/. Amen.
May he deepen your faith,
build up your hope,
and constantly increase the gift of his love in you.
R/. Amen.
May he keep all children
strong in body and in spirit.
R/. Amen.
And may almighty God bless all of you,
who are gathered here,
the Father, and the Son, X and the Holy Spirit.
R/. Amen.
8

• BLESSING OUTSIDE MASS •

B. Rite for the Blessing of a Child
in the Womb outside Mass
10. The present Rite is reserved to a Priest or, if no Priest is
available, to a Deacon.
Introductory Rites
11. When the community has gathered, a suitable chant may
be sung. Then the celebrant and the faithful, standing, sign
themselves with the Sign of the Cross, while the celebrant says:

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Spirit.
The people reply: Amen.
12. The celebrant greets those present in the following or other
suitable words:

May Christ, the Son of God,
who became man in the womb of the Virgin Mary,
be with you all.
The people reply: And with your spirit.
13. The celebrant prepares those present for the blessing, in
these or similar words:

9

• BLESSING OUTSIDE MASS •

(For one married couple)

It has pleased our heavenly Father to answer
the earnest prayers of N. and N. for the gift of a
child. Today we join them in offering heartfelt
thanks to almighty God for the joyful and solemn
responsibility of their newly conceived child,
created in the image and likeness of God as the
fruit of their mutual love.
Or:
(In other circumstances)

It has pleased our heavenly Father to bless this
community with the gift of new life. Today we
join in offering heartfelt thanks to almighty God
for this (these) newly conceived child (children),
created in the image and likeness of God.
Reading of the Word of God
14. The following or one of the other texts indicated from
the Lectionary for Mass for use in the Dioceses of the United
States of America is read. A reader, another person present, or
the celebrant himself reads the text of Sacred Scripture.

Brothers and sisters, listen to the words of the holy
1:39-45
Gospel according to Luke:
The infant leaped in her womb

10

• BLESSING OUTSIDE MASS •

Mary set out
and traveled to the hill country in haste
to a town of Judah,
where she entered the house of Zechariah
and greeted Elizabeth.
When Elizabeth heard Mary’s greeting,
the infant leaped in her womb,
and Elizabeth, filled with the holy Spirit,
cried out in a loud voice and said,
“Most blessed are you among women,
and blessed is the fruit of your womb.
And how does this happen to me,
that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
For at the moment the sound of your greeting
reached my ears,
the infant in my womb leaped for joy.
Blessed are you who believed
that what was spoken to you by the Lord
would be fulfilled. 
Or:
Genesis 18:1-15 [376]

1 Samuel 1:9-20 [306]

Ruth 2:1-3, 8-11; 4:13-17 [424]

Luke 1:26-38 [11]

The prophecy of Sarah’s con-
ception of Isaac
Hannah’s conception and
birth of Samuel
The birth of Obed, father of
Jesse, father of David
The Annunciation

11

• BLESSING OUTSIDE MASS •

15. If appropriate, the following Responsorial Psalm may be
sung or said.

R/. I will bless the Lord at all times.
Ps 34: 10-11, 12-13, 14-15, 17 and 19

Fear the Lord, you his holy ones,
for nought is lacking to those who fear him.
The great grow poor and hungry;
but those who seek the Lord want for no good
thing. R/.
Come children, hear me;
I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
Which of you desires life,
and takes delight in prosperous days? R/.
Keep your tongue from evil
and your lips from speaking guile;
Turn from evil, and do good;
seek peace, and follow after it. R/.
The Lord confronts the evildoers,
to destroy remembrance of them from the earth.
The Lord is close to the brokenhearted;
and those who are crushed in spirit he saves. R/.
16.
If appropriate, the celebrant may give those present a
brief explanation of the biblical text so that they may better
understand through faith the meaning of the celebration.

12

• BLESSING OUTSIDE MASS •

Universal Prayer (Prayer of the Faithful)
17.
The Prayer of the Faithful follows, either in the form
used at Mass or in the form provided here. From the following intentions those most appropriate for the occasion may be
used, or other appropriate intentions may be composed.
Priest:

We commend our cares and concerns to our
heavenly Father through his Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ, as we say:
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.
Deacon or Reader:

For our Holy Father, Pope N., for our Bishop N.,
and for all those who have dedicated their lives
to the service of God’s people, that they may be
faithful to the vocation they have received, we pray
to the Lord.
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.
For our civic leaders, that performing their duties
with justice and compassion, they may respect the
gift of human life, we pray to the Lord.
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.

13

• BLESSING OUTSIDE MASS •

For all expectant mothers, that as they await
the birth of their children they may experience
tranquility and good health, and safely deliver
their children, we pray to the Lord.
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.
For all families, that they may grow in their faith,
strengthened in their love for one another and in
their commitment to follow Christ, we pray to the
Lord.
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.
For children who are unwanted, unloved,
abandoned, or abused, that the Lord may inspire
his people with compassion and courage to protect
and care for them, we pray to the Lord.
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.
For all those for whom we pray in our personal
intentions, that they may receive the graces they
need, we pray to the Lord.
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.

14

• BLESSING OUTSIDE MASS •

For the faithful departed, that they may enjoy in
heaven the vision of God promised to all his sons
and daughters, we pray to the Lord.
R/. Lord, hear our prayer.
18.
The celebrant then invites all present to sing or say the
Lord’s Prayer:

At the Savior’s command
and formed by divine teaching,
we dare to say:
All say:

Our Father, who art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name;
thy kingdom come,
thy will be done
on earth as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our trespasses,
as we forgive those who trespass against us;
and lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil.

15

• BLESSING OUTSIDE MASS •

Prayer of Blessing
19.
If appropriate, the mother is invited to come forward,
along with the father and other family members. With hands
extended, the celebrant blesses the child in the womb and all
those present, in these words:

God, author of all life,
bless, we pray, this unborn child;
give constant protection
and grant a healthy birth
that is the sign of our rebirth one day
into the eternal rejoicing of heaven.
Lord, who have brought to this woman
the wondrous joy of motherhood,
grant her comfort in all anxiety
and make her determined
to lead her child along the ways of salvation.
[For the father:

Lord of the ages,
who have singled out this man
to know the grace and pride of fatherhood,
grant him courage in this new responsibility,
and make him an example of justice and truth for
this child.]

16

• BLESSING OUTSIDE MASS •

[For the family:

Lord, endow this family
with sincere and enduring love
as they prepare to welcome this child into
their midst.]
Lord, you have put into the hearts of all men and
women of good will
a great awe and wonder at the gift of new life;
fill this (parish) community
with faithfulness to the teachings of the Gospel
and new resolve to share
in the spiritual formation of this child in Christ
our Savior,
who lives and reigns for ever and ever.
R/. Amen.
The prayer of blessing in the plural is included as an appendix to the Rite, for occasions in which more than one expectant mother is present.
20.
If appropriate, the celebrant, in silence, may sprinkle
the parents of the unborn and any other family members
present with holy water.

17

• BLESSING OUTSIDE MASS •

Concluding Rite
21.
The celebrant, facing the people and extending his
hands, says:

The Lord be with you.
The people reply: And with your spirit.
Then the celebrant blesses the people, saying:

May almighty God bless all of you,
who are gathered here,
the Father, and the Son, X and the Holy Spirit.
R/. Amen.
22.
After the blessing the celebrant invites all present to
seek the protection of the Blessed Virgin Mary. If appropriate,
this may take place at the altar or statue of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

Hail, Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with you;
blessed are you among women,
and blessed is the fruit of your womb, Jesus.
Holy Mary, Mother of God,
pray for us sinners
now and at the hour of our death.
Amen.

18

• BLESSING OUTSIDE MASS •

Or:

Hail, holy Queen, mother of mercy,
our life, our sweetness, and our hope.
To you do we cry, poor banished children of Eve.
To you do we send up our sighs,
mourning and weeping in this valley of tears.
Turn then most gracious advocate,
your eyes of mercy toward us,
and after this exile show us
the blessed fruit of your womb, Jesus.
O clement, O loving, O sweet Virgin Mary.
Or:

Loving Mother of the Redeemer,
Gate of heaven, star of the sea,
assist your people
who have fallen yet strive to rise again.
To the wonderment of nature you bore your Creator,
yet remained a virgin after as before.
You who received Gabriel’s joyful greeting,
have pity on us, poor sinners.
Or all may sing a hymn which suitably expresses thanksgiving and joy.

19

• APPENDIX •

Appendix
Prayer of Blessing When Two or More Expectant Mothers
Are Present
23.
If appropriate, the mothers are invited to come forward, along with fathers and other family members who are
present. With hands extended, the celebrant blesses the children in the womb and all those present, in these words:

God, author of all life,
bless, we pray, these unborn children;
give them constant protection
and grant them a healthy birth
that is the sign of our rebirth one day
into the eternal rejoicing of heaven.
Lord, who have brought to these women
the wondrous joy of motherhood,
grant them comfort in all anxiety
and make them determined
to lead their children along the ways of salvation.
[For the fathers:

Lord of the ages,
who have singled out these men
to know the grace and pride of fatherhood,
grant them courage in this new responsibility,
and make them examples of justice and truth for
these children.]

20

• APPENDIX •

[For the family:

Lord, endow these families
with sincere and enduring love
as they prepare to welcome these children into
their midst.]
Lord, you have put into the hearts of all men and
women of good will
a great awe and wonder at the gift of new life;
fill this (parish) community
with faithfulness to the teachings of the Gospel
and new resolve to share
in the spiritual formation of these children in
Christ our Savior,
who lives and reigns for ever and ever.
R/. Amen.

21

CONGREGACIÓN PARA EL CULTO DIVINO
Y LA DISCIPLINA DE LOS SACRAMENTOS
Prot. n. 125/12/L

ESTADOS UNIDOS DE AMÉRICA
A la petición de Su Eminencia el Cardenal Timothy Michael Dolan, Arzobispo de
Nueva York y Presidente de la Conferencia de Obispos de los Estados Unidos de
América, en una carta fechada el 12 de enero de 2012, y en virtud de la facultad
concedida a esta Congregación por el Sumo Pontífice Benedicto XVI, estaremos
encantados de aprobar y confirmar el texto en español del Rito de bendición de una
criatura en el vientre materno, como se encuentra en la copia adjunta.
En las ediciones impresas, se hace mención de la aprobación y confirmación
concedida por la Sede Apostólica.
Además, dos copias del texto impreso deberán enviarse a esta Congregación.
Sin que obste nada en contrario.
Desde la sede de la Congregación para el Culto Divino y la Disciplina de los
Sacramentos, el 1º de marzo de 2012.

Antonio Card. Cañizares Llovera
Prefecto

X Joseph Augustine Di Noia, OP
Arzobispo-Secretario

CONFERENCIA DE OBISPOS CATÓLICOS DE LOS
ESTADOS UNIDOS
DECRETO DE PUBLICACIÓN
Según las normas establecidas por el decreto de la Sagrada Congregación de Ritos,
Cum, nostra ætate (del 27 de enero de 1966) y la Congregación para el Culto
Divino y la Disciplina de los Sacramentos, Liturgiam authenticam (del 28 de marzo
de 2001), esta edición del Rite for the Blessing of a Child in the Womb/Rito de bendición
de una criatura en el vientre materno es declarado como parte del Book of Blessings y
Bendicional para el uso en las diócesis de los Estados Unidos de América y se publica
con la autoridad de la Conferencia de Obispos Católicos de los Estados Unidos.
El Rite for the Blessing of a Child in the Womb/Rito de bendición de una criatura en
el vientre materno fue canónicamente aprobado por la Conferencia de Obispos
Católicos de los Estados Unidos el 11 de noviembre de 2008, y confirmado luego
en inglés por la Sede Apostólica por el decreto de la Congregación para el Culto
Divino y la Disciplina de los Sacramentos del 8 de diciembre de 2011 (Prot. n.
1422/08/L), y en español por el decreto de la misma Congregación del 1º de marzo
de 2012 (Prot. n. 125/12/L).
Desde esta fecha, el Rite for the Blessing of a Child in the Womb/Rito de bendición de una
criatura en el vientre materno puede ser utilizado en las celebraciones litúrgicas en las
diócesis de los Estados Unidos de América.
Dado en el Secretariado General de la Conferencia de Obispos Católicos de los
Estados Unidos, Washington, DC, el 26 de marzo de 2012, la Solemnidad de la
Anunciación del Señor.
Timothy Cardenal Dolan
Arzobispo de Nueva York
Presidente, Conferencia de Obispos Católicos de los Estados Unidos
Reverendo Monseñor Ronny E. Jenkins
Secretario General

• BENDICIÓN DENTRO DE LA MISA •

RITO DE BENDICIÓN DE
UNA CRIATURA EN EL
VIENTRE MATERNO
Introducción
1.
La Iglesia recibe con alegría y delicadeza a las madres
que, al reconocer que toda vida es don de Dios, llegan a la Iglesia en búsqueda de una bendición para la criatura que llevan
en su vientre. Esta bendición, que imparte gracia y consuelo,
ayuda a los padres y a la comunidad parroquial a unirse en
oración por las criaturas que aún están en el vientre y, a la vez,
fomentar dentro de la sociedad el respeto por la vida humana.
La bendición puede impartirse durante la Misa, por el
sacerdote celebrante, usando los ritos que se encuentran en
los números 3-9; ó fuera de la Misa, por el sacerdote o, en
su ausencia, por el diácono, según los ritos indicados en los
números 10-22.
2.
Se puede usar este rito para la bendición de la madre,
o de la madre junto con el padre, o en ocasión de una reunión
de padres que esperan un hijo.

A. Rito de bendición de una criatura en
el vientre materno dentro de la Misa
3.
Las lecturas para la Liturgia de la Palabra se deben
tomar del Leccionario de la Misa aprobado para los Estados
Unidos de América. Dependiendo de las indicaciones de las

24

• BENDICIÓN DENTRO DE LA MISA •

rúbricas del día, se pueden usar las lecturas asignadas a ese
día por el Leccionario de la Misa o tomarlas del Leccionario
de las Misas por diversas necesidades.
4.
La homilía sigue a la proclamación del Evangelio. En
ella, basándose en los textos sagrados, el sacerdote o diácono
puede ofrecer una explicación apropiada del don y el misterio
de la vida humana.
Oración Universal
5.
Después, sigue la Oración Universal, ya sea en la forma
utilizada en la Misa o como se ofrece aquí. Se pueden usar las
siguientes intercesiones o componer otras intenciones, adecuadas a las circunstancias particulares.
Sacerdote:

Encomendemos nuestras necesidades y
preocupaciones al Padre celestial, en nombre de
Jesucristo, su Hijo, nuestro Señor, diciendo:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.
Diácono/Lector:

Por nuestro Santo Padre, el Papa N., por nuestro
obispo N., y por todos aquellos que han dedicado
su vida al servicio del pueblo de Dios, para que
puedan perseverar fielmente en la vocación que
han recibido, roguemos al Señor:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.
25

• BENDICIÓN DENTRO DE LA MISA •

Por nuestros gobernantes, para que puedan ejercer
sus responsabilidades con justicia y compasión,
respetando el don de la vida humana, roguemos al
Señor:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.
Por todas las madres que están esperando un hijo,
para que tengan un parto feliz y sus niños nazcan
saludables, roguemos al Señor:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.
Por todas las familias, para que continúen
creciendo en la fe, fortaleciéndose en el amor
mutuo y en su compromiso con Cristo, roguemos al
Señor:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.
Por los niños que no son deseados ni amados, por
los que son abandonados o víctimas de abusos,
para que el Señor inspire a su pueblo la forma de
protegerlos, roguemos al Señor:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.

26

• BENDICIÓN DENTRO DE LA MISA •

Por quienes se encomiendan a nuestras oraciones,
para que puedan recibir la gracia que necesitan,
roguemos al Señor:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.
Por nuestros hermanos difuntos, para que gocen en
el cielo de la visión de Dios, prometida a todos sus
hijos, roguemos al Señor:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.
Oración de Bendición
6.
Si parece oportuno, se invita a la madre a pasar adelante, junto con el padre y otros miembros de la familia. Con
las manos extendidas sobre la madre, el sacerdote concluye
las intercesiones con la bendición de la criatura en el vientre
materno y de todos los presentes, con las siguientes palabras:

Dios, autor de toda vida,
te pedimos que bendigas a este niño aún por nacer;
dale una constante protección
y un saludable nacimiento,
como signo de nuestro renacimiento, un día,
al gozo de la vida eterna en el cielo.
Señor, que has concedido a esta mujer
el gran gozo de la maternidad,
concédele serenidad en sus preocupaciones
y dale decisión para guiar a su hijo
por los caminos de la salvación.
27

• BENDICIÓN DENTRO DE LA MISA •

[Bendición del padre:

Señor de todos los tiempos,
que has escogido a este hombre
para experimentar el don y el honor de
la paternidad,
dale fortaleza en esta nueva responsabilidad
para que sea ejemplo de justicia y verdad para
su hijo.]
[Bendición de la familia:

Señor, derrama sobre esta familia un amor sincero
y constante,
para que se preparen a recibir a este niño
entre ellos.]
Señor, que has puesto en el corazón de todos los
hombres y mujeres de buena voluntad
un gran respeto y admiración por el regalo de una
nueva vida,
haz que esta comunidad (parroquia),
fiel a las enseñanzas del Evangelio,
participe en la educación espiritual de este niño,
en Cristo, nuestro Salvador.
Qué vive y reina por los siglos de los siglos.
R/. Amén.
La oración de bendición en plural se encuentra en el apéndice
de este ritual, para las ocasiones en que estén presentes varias
madres en cinta.
28

• BENDICIÓN DENTRO DE LA MISA •

7.
Si se considera apropiado, el sacerdote, en silencio,
puede asperjar con agua bendita a los padres de la criatura y
a otros miembros de la familia.
8.
En la Liturgia de la Eucaristía se sigue el Ordinario de
la Misa, según el Misal. Si se considera oportuno, algunos de
los fieles llevan el pan y el vino para la celebración de la Eucaristía y, según las circunstancias, otros dones para socorrer a
familias necesitadas.
9.
Al final de la Misa, el sacerdote bendice a los presentes en la forma acostumbrada, o con la fórmula de bendición
solemne, tomada del Misal, o la que a continuación se pone.
El diácono, o en su ausencia, el sacerdote mismo, dice
la invitación:

Inclínense para recibir la bendición.
Entonces el sacerdote, con las manos extendidas sobre el
pueblo, dice:

Dios, fuente de toda vida,
en su bondad, les proteja.
R/. Amén.
Les afiance en la fe,
les fortalezca en la esperanza
y constantemente aumente en ustedes el don de
su amor.
R/. Amén.

29

• BENDICIÓN DENTRO DE LA MISA •

Mantenga a todos los niños
fuertes en cuerpo y alma.
R/. Amén.
A todos ustedes, que están aquí presentes,
les bendiga Dios todopoderoso,
Padre, Hijo X, y Espíritu Santo.
R/. Amén.

30

• BENDICIÓN FUER A DE LA MISA •

B. Rito de bendición de una criatura en
el vientre materno fuera de la Misa
10.
El presente rito está reservado al sacerdote o, en su
ausencia, al diácono.
Ritos Iniciales
11.
Cuando la comunidad se ha reunido, puede entonarse
un canto apropiado. Después, el celebrante y los fieles, de pie,
se santiguan con la señal de la Cruz, mientras el celebrante
dice:

En el nombre del Padre, y del Hijo, y del
Espíritu Santo.
Los fieles responden: Amén.
12.
El celebrante saluda a los presentes con estas u otras
palabras semejantes:

Que Cristo, Hijo de Dios,
que se encarnó en el vientre de la Virgen María,
esté con todos ustedes.
Los fieles responden: Y con tu espíritu.
13.
El celebrante prepara a los presentes para la bendición
con estas u otras palabras semejantes:

31

• BENDICIÓN FUER A DE LA MISA •

Para un matrimonio:

Nuestro Padre celestial se ha dignado responder
a las plegarias de N. y N. con el don de este niño.
Hoy nos unimos a ellos en su acción de gracias a
Dios todopoderoso, por la gozosa e importante
responsabilidad hacia este nuevo niño concebido,
creado a imagen y semejanza de Dios, y fruto del
amor mutuo de estos esposos.
O bien, en otras circunstancias:

Nuestro Padre celestial se ha dignado bendecir
a esta comunidad con el don de esta nueva
vida. Hoy nos unimos en acción de gracias a
Dios todopoderoso, por este niño (estos niños)
concebido(s), creado(s) a imagen y semejanza de
Dios.
Lectura de la Palabra de Dios
14.
Se lee uno de los siguientes textos indicados, tomados del Leccionario de la Misa para los Estados Unidos de
América. Un lector, o alguno de los presentes, o el mismo celebrante lee el texto de la Sagrada Escritura:

Hermanos y hermanas, escuchen las palabras del
1, 39-45
Santo Evangelio según san Lucas:
Saltó la criatura en el vientre

En aquellos días, María se encaminó presurosa a
un pueblo de las montañas de Judea, y entrando en
32

• BENDICIÓN FUER A DE LA MISA •

la casa de Zacarías, saludó a Isabel. En cuanto ésta
oyó el saludo de María, la criatura saltó en su seno.
Entonces Isabel quedó llena del Espíritu Santo, y
levantando la voz, exclamó: “¡Bendita tú entre las
mujeres y bendito el fruto de tu vientre! ¿Quién
soy yo, para que la madre de mi Señor venga a
verme? Apenas llegó tu saludo a mis oídos, el
niño saltó de gozo en mi seno. Dichosa tú, que has
creído, porque se cumplirá cuanto te fue anunciado
de parte del Señor .
Palabra del Señor.
Todos: Gloria a ti, Señor Jesús.
O bien:
Génesis 18, 1-15 [376]

1 Samuel 1, 9-20 [306]

Rut 2, 1-3. 8-11; 4, 13-17 [424]

Lucas 1, 26-38 [11]

El anuncio a Sara de la con-
cepción de Isaac
Ana concibe y da a luz a
Samuel
El nacimiento de Obed, padre
de Jesé, padre de David
La anunciación

15.
Si se considera oportuno, se puede cantar o decir el
siguiente Salmo responsorial.

R/. Bendigo al Señor en todo momento.
Salmo 33, 10-11. 12-13. 14-15. 17 y 19

33

• BENDICIÓN FUER A DE LA MISA •

Todos sus santos, teman al Señor,
porque nada les falta a los que le temen;
los ricos empobrecen y pasan hambre,
los que buscan al Señor no carecen de nada. R/.
Vengan, hijos, escúchenme:
les instruiré en el temor del Señor;
¿hay alguien que ame la vida
y desee días de prosperidad? R/.
Guarda tu lengua del mal,
tus labios de la falsedad;
apártate del mal, obra el bien,
busca la paz y corre tras ella. R/.
Pero el Señor se enfrenta con los malhechores,
para borrar de la tierra su memoria.
El Señor está cerca de los atribulados,
salva a los abatidos. R/.
16.
Si es apropiado, el celebrante puede hacer una explicación breve de los textos bíblicos, para que puedan entender,
a través de la fe, el sentido de la celebración.
Oración Universal
17.
Después, sigue la Oración Universal, ya sea en la forma
utilizada en la Misa o como se ofrece aquí. Se pueden usar las
siguientes intercesiones o componer otras intenciones, adecuadas a las circunstancias particulares.

34

• BENDICIÓN FUER A DE LA MISA •

Sacerdote:

Encomendemos nuestras necesidades y
preocupaciones al Padre celestial, en nombre de
Jesucristo, su Hijo, nuestro Señor, diciendo:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.
Diácono/Lector:

Por nuestro Santo Padre, el Papa N., por nuestro
obispo N., y por todos aquellos que han dedicado
su vida al servicio del pueblo de Dios, para que
puedan perseverar fielmente en la vocación que
han recibido, roguemos al Señor:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.
Por nuestros gobernantes, para que puedan ejercer
sus responsabilidades con justicia y compasión,
respetando el don de la vida humana, roguemos al
Señor:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.
Por todas las madres que están esperando un hijo,
para que tengan un parto feliz y sus niños nazcan
saludables, roguemos al Señor:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.

35

• BENDICIÓN FUER A DE LA MISA •

Por todas las familias, para que continúen
creciendo en la fe, fortaleciéndose en el amor
mutuo y en su compromiso con Cristo, roguemos al
Señor:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.
Por los niños que no son deseados ni amados, por
los que son abandonados o víctimas de abusos,
para que el Señor inspire a su pueblo la forma de
protegerlos, roguemos al Señor:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.
Por quienes se encomiendan a nuestras oraciones,
para que puedan recibir la gracia que necesitan,
roguemos al Señor:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.
Por nuestros hermanos difuntos, para que gocen en
el cielo de la visión de Dios, prometida a todos sus
hijos, roguemos al Señor:
R/. Señor, escucha nuestra oración.

36

• BENDICIÓN FUER A DE LA MISA •

18.
El celebrante entonces invita a todos los presentes a
cantar o a decir el Padre Nuestro.

Fieles a la recomendación del Salvador
y siguiendo su divina enseñanza,
nos atrevemos a decir:
Todos:

Padre nuestro, que estás en el cielo,
santificado sea tu Nombre;
venga a nosotros tu reino;
hágase tu voluntad en la tierra como en el cielo.
Danos hoy nuestro pan de cada día;
perdona nuestras ofensas,
como también nosotros perdonamos
a los que nos ofenden;
no nos dejes caer en la tentación,
y líbranos del mal.

Oración de Bendición
19.
Si parece oportuno, se invita a la madre a pasar adelante, junto con el padre y otros miembros de la familia. Con
las manos extendidas sobre la madre, el sacerdote concluye
las intercesiones con la bendición de la criatura en el vientre
materno y de todos los presentes, con las siguientes palabras:

37

• BENDICIÓN FUER A DE LA MISA •

Dios, autor de toda vida,
te pedimos que bendigas a este niño aún por nacer;
dale una constante protección
y un saludable nacimiento,
como signo de nuestro renacimiento, un día,
al gozo de la vida eterna en el cielo.
Señor, que has concedido a esta mujer
el gran gozo de la maternidad,
concédele serenidad en sus preocupaciones
y dale decisión para guiar a su hijo
por los caminos de la salvación.
[Bendición del padre:

Señor de todos los tiempos,
que has escogido a este hombre
para experimentar el don y el honor de la
paternidad,
dale fortaleza en esta nueva responsabilidad
para que sea ejemplo de justicia y verdad para
su hijo.]
[Bendición de la familia:

Señor, derrama sobre esta familia un amor sincero
y constante,
para que se preparen a recibir a este niño
entre ellos.]

38

• BENDICIÓN FUER A DE LA MISA •

Señor, que has puesto en el corazón de todos los
hombres y mujeres de buena voluntad
un gran respeto y admiración por el regalo de una
nueva vida,
haz que esta comunidad (parroquia),
fiel a las enseñanzas del Evangelio,
participe en la educación espiritual de este niño,
en Cristo, nuestro Salvador.
Qué vive y reina por los siglos de los siglos.
R/. Amén.
La oración de bendición en plural se encuentra en el apéndice
de este ritual, para las ocasiones en que estén presentes varias
madres en cinta.
20.
Si se considera apropiado, el sacerdote, en silencio,
puede asperjar con agua bendita a los padres de la criatura y
a otros miembros de la familia.
Rito de Conclusión
21.
Entonces, el sacerdote, de cara al pueblo y extendiendo
las manos, dice:

El Señor esté con ustedes.
Los fieles responden: Y con tu espíritu.

39

• BENDICIÓN FUER A DE LA MISA •

Entonces el celebrante bendice al pueblo diciendo:

A todos ustedes, que están aquí presentes,
les bendiga Dios todopoderoso,
Padre, Hijo X, y Espíritu Santo.
R/. Amén.
22.
Después de la bendición, el sacerdote invita a todos los
presentes a pedir la protección de la Santísima Virgen María.
Si es apropiado, esto puede hacerse ante el altar o imagen de
la Santísima Virgen María.

Dios te salve, Maria,
llena eres de gracia,
el Señor es contigo.
Bendita tú eres entre todas las mujeres
y bendito es el fruto de tu vientre, Jesús.
Santa María, Madre de Dios,
ruega por nosotros pecadores,
ahora y en la hora de nuestra muerte.
Amén.
O bien:

Dios te salve, Reina y Madre de Misericordia,
vida, dulzura y esperanza nuestra; Dios te salve.
A ti llamamos, los desterrados hijos de Eva;
a ti suspiramos, gimiendo y llorando, en este valle
de lágrimas.
Ea, pues, Señora, abogada nuestra,
vuelve a nosotros esos tus ojos misericordiosos,

40

• BENDICIÓN FUER A DE LA MISA •

y, después de este destierro, muéstranos a Jesús,
fruto bendito de tu vientre.
¡Oh clemente, oh piadosa, oh dulce Virgen María!
O bien:

Madre del Redentor, Virgen fecunda,
puerta del cielo siempre abierta,
estrella del mar,
ven a librar al pueblo que tropieza
y quiere levantarse.
Ante la admiración de cielo y tierra,
engendraste a tu Santo Creador,
y permaneces siempre Virgen.
Recibe el saludo del ángel Gabriel,
y ten piedad de nosotros, pecadores.
O todos pueden entonar un himno, que exprese apropiadamente la gratitud y la alegría.

41

• APÉNDICE •

Apéndice
Oración de bendición cuando estén presentes varias
madres en cinta
23.
Si es apropiado, se invita a las madres, junto con los
padres y otros miembros de la familia, a pasar adelante. Con
las manos extendidas sobre las madres, el sacerdote concluye
las intercesiones bendiciendo a las criaturas en el vientre de
sus madres y a todos los presentes, con las siguientes palabras:

Dios, autor de toda vida,
te pedimos que bendigas a estos niños aún
por nacer;
dales una constante protección
y un saludable nacimiento,
como signo de nuestro renacimiento, un día, al
gozo de la vida eterna en el cielo.
Señor, que has concedido a estas mujeres
el gran gozo de la maternidad,
concédeles serenidad en sus preocupaciones
y dales decisión para guiar a sus hijos
por los caminos de la salvación.
[Bendición del padre:

Señor de todos los tiempos,
que has escogido a estos hombres
para experimentar el don y el honor de
la paternidad,

42

• APÉNDICE •

dales fortaleza en esta nueva responsabilidad
para que sean ejemplo de justicia y verdad para
sus hijos.]
[Bendición de la familia:

Señor, derrama sobre estas familias un amor
sincero y constante,
para que se preparen a recibir a estos niños
entre ellos.]
Señor, que has puesto en el corazón de todos los
hombres y mujeres de buena voluntad
un gran respeto y admiración por el regalo de una
nueva vida,
haz que esta comunidad (parroquia),
fiel a las enseñanzas del Evangelio,
participe en la educación espiritual de estos niños,
en Cristo, nuestro Salvador.
Qué vive y reina por los siglos de los siglos.
R/. Amén.

43

 id="file23242548" filename="rite-of-blessing-and-enrollment-with-the-brown-scapular-of-our-lady-of-mount-carmel-11829" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.ewtn.com/catholicism/library/rite-of-blessing-and-enrollment-with-the-brown-scapular-of-our-lady-of-mount-carmel-11829">
 Rite of Blessing and Enrollment with the Brown Scapular of Our Lady of Mount Carmel 
 Rite of Blessing and Enrollment with the Brown Scapular of Our Lady of Mount Carmel 
 Author: NA 
 BLESSING AND ENROLLMENT OF THE BROWN SCAPULAR OF OUR LADY OF MOUNT CARMEL 
 CELEBRANT: IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, AND OF THE SON, AND OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 
 P: AND LET MY CRY COME UNTO THEE. 
 O LORD, JESUS CHRIST, SAVIOR OF THE HUMAN RACE, WITH YOUR RIGHT HAND SANCTIFY + THESE HABITS WHICH YOUR SERVANTS ARE TO WEAR DEVOUTLY OUT OF LOVE FOR YOU AND YOUR MOTHER, THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY OF MOUNT CARMEL, IN ORDER THAT THROUGH THE INTERCESSION OF THE SAME BLESSES MOTHER, THEY MAY BE DEFENDED FROM THE EVIL ONE AND MAY PERSEVERE IN YOUR GRACE UNTIL DEATH, WHO LIVES AND REIGNS, WORLD WITHOUT END, AMEN. 
 [sprinkle with Holy Water] 
 RECEIVE THESE BLESSED SCAPULARS AND PRAY THAT THE MOST HOLY VIRGIN MARY, THAT BY HER MERITS YOU MAY WEAR THEM WITHOUT STAIN AND THAT SHE MAY GUARD YOU FROM ALL ADVERSITY AND BRING YOU UNTO EVERLASTING LIFE. 
 [Priest places Scapular on individual saying:] 
 IN VIRTUE OF THE POWER GIVEN TO ME , I ADMIT YOU TO SHARE IN ALL THE SPIRITUAL GOODS WHICH THROUGH THE MERCIFUL ASSISTANCE OF JESUS CHRIST ARE PERFORMED BY THE RELIGIOUS OF MOUNT CARMEL. IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, + AND OF THE SON, AND OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, AMEN. 
 [people return to pews] 
 MAY ALMIGHTY GOD, THE CREATOR OF HEAVEN AND EARTH, BLESS YOU, HE WHO HAS CHOSEN TO ENROLL YOU IN THE CONFRATERNITY OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY OF MOUNT CARMEL: WE IMPLORE HER TO CRUSH THE HEAD OF THE OLD SERPENT IN THE HOUR OF YOUR DEATH AND HELP YOU TO ATTAIN AT LAST UNTO THE PALM AND CROWN OF THE EVERLASTING INHERITANCE. THROUGH CHRIST OUR LORD, AMEN. 

 id="file23242777" filename="rites-and-ceremonies" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.patheos.com/library/mormonism/ritual-worship-devotion-symbolism/rites-and-ceremonies">
 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints 
 Rituals and Worship 
 Rites and Ceremonies 
 Mormonism is generally considered to be a liturgically simple faith because it lacks complex and ornate public rituals. This is a reasonable assessment, but the private temple rituals are considerably more sophisticated. Although Mormons do not baptize children until they are 8 years old, Mormon infants are publicly named and blessed in a ritual that is performed in front of the child's home congregation. This ritual, as with all public rituals, is performed by a lay male member of the Church who holds the Church's priesthood. In most cases, this means that the father or husband of the family performs the ritual. 
 The priesthood in the LDS Church (Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints) is divided into two parts: the lesser, or Aaronic priesthood, and the higher, or Melchizedek priesthood. Only males are eligible for ordination, which occurs at the age of twelve for the Aaronic and eighteen for the Melchizedek. 
 The most frequently performed public Mormon ritual is the faith's version of the common Protestant and Catholic rituals of "communion." The Mormon ritual of "sacrament" originated with a revelation recorded by Joseph Smith in April 1830, which enjoined the Mormons to "meet together often to partake of the bread and wine in remembrance of the Lord Jesus." This revelation translated into the practice of weekly sacrament meetings. Individuals who have been ordained to the priesthood, usually younger men and boys with the Aaronic Priesthood, consecrate bread and water through formal prayers with a set wording. After the emblems are blessed, they are distributed to the congregation by other Aaronic priesthood holders. This ritual is designed to renew the covenants that Mormons make at baptism to obey God's commandments, to remember in daily life the sacrifice of Christ, and to ensure that God's spirit may constantly accompany the participant. 
 Mormons practice baptisms by immersion, which are usually performed in fonts located in LDS chapels (although in some cases baptisms are performed in natural bodies of water). This ritual is typically performed shortly after a child of Mormon parents turns 8 years old. Like the sacrament, the rite of baptism follows a set prayer and can be performed by one holding the Aaronic priesthood, although often the child's father or an adult friend with the Melchizedek priesthood performs the ordinance. Adults who join the Church are also baptized following the same ritual. 
 Baptism is followed by an accompanying rite that involves the conferral of the Gift of the Holy Ghost upon the newly baptized member. This ritual must be performed by one holding the Melchizedek (or higher) priesthood who places his hands on the recipient's head and confers the gift. Other rituals include the conferral of priesthood authority and the blessing of the sick. In both cases, the rituals are performed by an individual who holds the Melchizedek priesthood placing his hands on the head of the recipient and speaking prayers without formal wording. 
 The private rituals of Mormonism take place within the Church's temples and may only be performed or witnessed by members of the Church who are in good standing. Although Mormons who have participated in these rituals take solemn vows not to disclose the specifics of the ceremonies to anyone, the LDS Church has published general descriptions of the rites. The main temple ritual is called the "endowment" and consists of a recitation of the main events of sacred history, including the creation of the earth and the events that took place in the Garden of Eden, as well as a process of covenant making in which the initiate agrees to live according the teachings of the LDS Church. Worthy Mormons also participate in ceremonies of "sealing" in which spouses are married for eternity and in which children are bound to their parents in an eternal family unit. In both the endowment and sealing rituals, Mormons dress in ceremonial clothing, a practice that adds to the liturgical richness and complexity of the temple rites. 
 LDS temples are also the sites for rituals performed on behalf of the dead. LDS doctrine maintains that individuals who die without knowledge of the true gospel must be provided with an opportunity to accept those teachings in the afterlife. It is the responsibility of faithful Mormons to search out the genealogical records of their ancestors and to perform by proxy all of the sacred ordinances and rituals of Mormonism. Mormons are thus baptized, endowed, and sealed during temple rituals in which they stand in for those who are deceased. The rituals performed in temples, in contrast to the public rituals, are presided over and, in the case of sealings, performed by individuals with special responsibility for temple work. 
 Get the latest from Patheos by signing up for our newsletters. Try our 3 most popular, or select from our huge collection of unique and thought-provoking newsletters. 
 Best of Patheos 
 Simply the finest and most popular features from Patheos columnists. 
 Sharing the Gospel 
 The best in evangelical thought, commentary on current events and culture, and biblical wisdom designed to energize your Christian faith. 
 Christians For a Better Christianity 
 News and commentary from today’s top Progressive Christian voices on faith and politics, social justice, transforming theology, the Bible and more. 
 From time to time you will also receive Special Offers from our partners that help us make this content free for you. You can opt out of these offers at any time. 

 id="file23242778" filename="rites-and-ceremonies" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.patheos.com/library/roman-catholicism/ritual-worship-devotion-symbolism/rites-and-ceremonies">
 Roman Catholicism 
 Rituals and Worship 
 Rites and Ceremonies 
 The point of entry into the world of Catholic ritual is the Mass, the main worship ceremony of the Church. The Mass is highly structured, with four sections: the Introductory Rites, the Liturgy of the Word, the Liturgy of the Eucharist, and the Concluding Rites. During the Introductory Rites, the priest and others who will serve as his helpers for the Mass enter the sanctuary, where believers are already gathered; opening prayers are spoken, believers are called upon to remember their sins, and the glory of God is praised. In the Concluding Rite, the people are blessed and sent back into the world renewed by their experience of God's presence in the Mass. 
 The liturgies (Greek for "worship") reflect the importance to Catholics of both the sacred narratives contained in scripture and their physical communion with the divine. The Liturgy of the Word is composed of readings from the Hebrew scriptures and the New Testament; the recitation of the Church's main profession of faith, the Nicene Creed, by the entire community; prayers for the people; and the homily (the preaching done by the priest or deacon). 
 The Liturgy of the Eucharist is the core of the Mass and the heart of Catholic belief. Monetary gifts of the faithful as well as the sacrificial gifts of the bread and wine are brought to the altar; the priest and the participants speak a series of formal prayers, including a communal recitation of the Lord's Prayer; believers exchange a sign of peace among themselves in the form of a greeting or a handshake; and the entire community watches the transformation of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, which believers then receive into their own bodies. This transformation from the simple elements of bread and wine into the physical presence of the divine is called transubstantiation and is a point of mystery and wonder for Catholics. 
 For centuries the Mass was celebrated almost exclusively in Latin with little to no variation based on local culture. Following the reforms of the Second Vatican Council in the 1960's, the Church opened the Mass to be celebrated in the languages of the people and encouraged more participation by believers. The Church has charged its adherents around the world with creating Masses that reflect their own cultures and heritages while still retaining the central doctrinal and symbolic elements. This is one of the wonders of the Church, that on any given day a Catholic can attend Mass in any area of the world and find the same ritual being performed: the same scriptures will be read, the same order will be preserved, the same creed will be spoken, and the same Eucharist will be celebrated. While there surely have been changes over the centuries, most of these elements have been part and parcel of the Mass for well over a thousand years. 
 The Eucharist is one of seven sacraments, rituals that carry the Catholic from the cradle to the grave. The purpose of the sacraments is to confer grace to the believer, and bring him or her into closer relationship with the divine. The recipient must have faith in God and the sacraments for them to be efficacious; in other words, the person must present no obstacle to the salvific work of the sacrament for it to have its intended effect, which is to strengthen that faith. The sacraments are divided into three categories: initiation, healing, and vocation. 
 Baptism, Confirmation, and the Eucharist are the sacraments of initiation, bringing the infant or the converted adult into the divine life as lived in the Church. Baptism was traditionally understood as washing away the stain of original sin, but is now seen as welcoming the new believer into the Christian community. Confirmation is an affirmation of the gift of grace through the Holy Spirit, usually made after the child is of an age to make decisions for himself or herself. When unbaptized adults convert to Catholicism, they usually celebrate Baptism and Confirmation at the same time. 
 Reconciliation and the Anointing of the Sick are the sacraments of healing, the first dealing with the spiritual sickness of sin and the second with illness of the body. Reconciliation is the process of contrition and confession of sins to a priest, who in the name of God grants absolution, or forgiveness, for the sins. The Anointing of the Sick, also called Extreme Unction, is the ritual blessing of a person who is gravely ill. When close to death, a person may receive the Last Rites, which includes the sacraments of Reconciliation, the Anointing of the Sick, and the Eucharist, in preparation for the journey beyond death. 
 The Sacraments of vocation, Marriage and Holy Orders, are designed to lead someone other than the recipient toward salvation; they confer a mission on the recipient as well as the grace to carry it out. Marriage is the sacramental joining of a man and a woman into a communion. This is the one sacrament not performed by a priest: although a priest presides at the wedding and grants the Church's blessing, the bride and groom actually confer the sacrament on each other. The sacrament of Holy Orders confers an apostolic ministry on men as they become deacons, priests, or bishops serving the Church; women do not receive Holy Orders. 
 Study Questions: 1. How is Mass structured? What is its purpose? 2. What is transubstantiation? How does it create community? 3. Why is tradition important to the integrity of the Catholic Church? 4. How are Catholic sacraments divided? What is the purpose of each? 
 Get the latest from Patheos by signing up for our newsletters. Try our 3 most popular, or select from our huge collection of unique and thought-provoking newsletters. 
 Best of Patheos 
 Simply the finest and most popular features from Patheos columnists. 
 Sharing the Gospel 
 The best in evangelical thought, commentary on current events and culture, and biblical wisdom designed to energize your Christian faith. 
 Christians For a Better Christianity 
 News and commentary from today’s top Progressive Christian voices on faith and politics, social justice, transforming theology, the Bible and more. 
 From time to time you will also receive Special Offers from our partners that help us make this content free for you. You can opt out of these offers at any time. 

 id="file23242629" filename="rites-catholic-church" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://blessedisshe.net/blog/rites-catholic-church/">
 DAILY DEVOTIONS 
 A Brief Overview of the Various Rites Within the Catholic Church 
 April 7, 2021 
 When Catholics consider what distinguishes our Faith from Protestant and Evangelical denominations, we naturally think of the Mass. Catholics attend the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. Other Christians do not. 
 As we regard other Catholic attributes, we look to the sacramental life of the Church, as well as to our use of sacramentals. We notice various prayers unique to Catholics, as well as our veneration of the crucifix and other sacred images. 
 Catholic: One, Holy, Apostolic 
 Many things set Catholics apart from Christian denominations. And yet, even within the one, holy, catholic, and apostolic Church, we recognize a beautiful, rich, and diverse history of liturgical tradition. 
 This Catholic diversity is mainly found in six particular liturgical rites comprising twenty-three distinct Catholic churches. 
 That’s right! There are twenty-three unique sui iuris churches within our one Catholic Church! 
 Lexicon: Rites and Churches 
 Before we explore the history and unique expressions of these different rites, let’s define a few terms. Specifically the difference between rite and church:. 
 A rite consists of “the diverse liturgical traditions in which the one catholic and apostolic faith has come to be expressed and celebrated in various cultures and lands  (Catechism Glossary). 
 A church is “a group of Christian faithful united by a hierarchy according to the norm of law which the supreme authority of the Church expressly or tacitly recognizes  (Canon 27). 
 Thus, we conclude that a rite reflects ritual traditions and customs, while a church comprises the people within those traditions. 
 Churches in Full Communion 
 Within the Catholic Church, all twenty-three rites are in full communion with one another, meaning they are not in schism, or separated, like Orthodox or Protestant denominations. You may attend any of these Catholic liturgies and participate in the Holy Eucharist and other Sacraments. While liturgical traditions may look differently among these Catholic rites, based on their location and language, they retain a similar structure with readings from Scripture and the Consecration of bread and wine into the Body and Blood of Christ. 
 In addition, all of these churches submit to all Catholic doctrines and dogmas defined by the Magisterium of the Catholic Church. 
 Lastly, all churches recognize the primacy of the Pope, who is the patriarch over all the various rites within the Catholic Church. 
 WEEKLY BLOG UPDATES (+ more!) 
 We'll send you the blog updates weekly in your inbox (with some special tips + tricks to living liturgically from our Blog Editor, Olivia Spears). 
 NAME* 
 First 
 Email* 
 Δ 
 From the Beginning 
 All of these churches started in one place: the Upper Room on Pentecost. The Blessed Mother and the Apostles were assembled there, and they received the Holy Spirit. On that day, the Apostles began to fulfill the Great Commission of Jesus Christ: 
 Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, and teaching them to obey everything that I have commanded you. // Matthew 28:19-20 
 They went out and preached the Gospel to various nations. As the Gospel took root in different lands, followers of Jesus “devoted themselves to the apostles’ teaching and fellowship, to the breaking of bread and the prayers  (Acts 2:42). 
 Because each Apostle went to a different nation, the liturgical traditions that began to take shape looked slightly distinct. Yes, there was a “diversity in unity, a Church of churches,  as Byzantine Catholic Deacon Daniel Dozier describes. 
 History of Schism 
 However, these churches did not maintain unity. All of them—with the exception of two churches—split from the Roman Rite at some point in history. 
 For example, communion between the Alexandrian and Antiochene Rites and the Latin and Byzantine Rites broke in 451. However, the Latin and Byzantine Churches did not excommunicate from one another until the Great Schism of 1054. The Armenian Church split from the Roman Rite in 1054 as well. 
 It took several failed attempts throughout the centuries before these churches finally returned to full communion with one another. Because the schism lasted so long, many Eastern churches have an Orthodox counterpart that is still not in full communion with the Catholic Church. 
 Eastern and Western Churches 
 One way to differentiate the various rites and churches is geographically. 
 The Latin (or Roman) Rite—with which most of you, dear readers, are familiar—is the largest rite within the Church. It is also the only Western Church. 
 The rest of the various rites are geographically from the East. 
 In 1894, Pope Leo XIII wrote about the importance of the Eastern Churches within our Catholic heritage: 
 The Churches of the East are worthy of the glory and reverence that they hold throughout the whole of Christendom in virtue of those extremely ancient, singular memorials that they have bequeathed to us. For it was in that part of the world that the first actions for the redemption of the human race began, in accord with the all-kind plan of God. They swiftly gave forth their yield: there flowered in first blush the glories of preaching the True Faith to the nations, of martyrdom, and of holiness. They gave us the first joys of the fruits of salvation … 
 Noteworthy Similarities 
 There are several noteworthy similarities among Eastern Churches that distinguish them from the Latin Rite. 
 In most Eastern rites, infants receive all three Sacraments of Initiation (Baptism, Holy Communion, and Confirmation) at the same time. 
 All Eastern rites receive the Holy Eucharist on the tongue, never in the hand. Within some rites, the priest dips the Host into the Precious Blood and then places it on the communicant’s tongue, which is called intinction. 
 Eastern Catholics, in general, fast more strictly than Western Catholics. They have more fasting seasons than Lent. During these fasting periods, they not only abstain from meat but also fish, eggs and dairy products, wine, and oil (noting a few days of exception). 
 Many Eastern Catholics use a prayer rope or beads, called a chotki, instead of a Rosary. It is customary to use the chotki to pray a simple prayer called The Jesus Prayer. 
 Persecution of Eastern Catholics 
 Sadly, another similarity among Eastern Catholics is their experience of persecution for the Faith. 
 Tertullian once said that “the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the church.  And Eastern Catholics have heroically lived out that old maxim. 
 Throughout history, Eastern Catholics have endured centuries of hatred and cruelty because of their faith in Jesus Christ. Many have been willing to die for the Lord, and these churches never perished. 
 For Roman Catholics, our concept of religious persecution can seem removed. We read stories of Saints who died for the Faith, but there are very few modern-day examples of religious persecution. For Eastern Catholics, however, this persecution has lasted even to the present day. 
 Exploring Each Catholic Rite 
 As we have mentioned, each of the six rites possess ancient roots, going all the way back to the Apostles. For all Catholic rites, liturgy is very important and is considered a type of catechism, central to forming disciples. In the Latin Rite, we say, “lex orandi, lex credendi,  meaning “the way we worship is what we believe.  
 Deacon Dozier says that “an entrance into the liturgy is an entrance into the kingdom.  
 So, even though there are liturgical distinctions among the Catholic rites, together, they create a beautiful mosaic of shared faith. 
 Latin Rite 
 Again, the Latin (or Roman) Rite is the largest rite and the only Western Church. It is expressed within three liturgies: Tridentine (Traditional Latin Mass), Novus Ordo (post-Vatican II Mass said in the vernacular), and Anglican Use. 
 Under the Roman Catholic Church, there are other liturgical rites that date from before the mid-1500s: 
 Mozarabic Rite (Spain) 
 Ambrosian Rite (Italy) 
 Bragan Rite (Portugal) 
 Liturgies of the Dominican, Carmelite, and Carthusian orders 
 Byzantine Rite 
 When most people think of Eastern Catholicism, they think of the Byzantine tradition. It comprises of fourteen unique churches: 
 Albanian Catholic Church 
 Belarusian Catholic Church 
 Bulgarian Greek Catholic Church 
 Byzantine Church of Croatia, Serbia, and Montenegro 
 Byzantine Liturgical Traditions 
 Byzantine divine liturgies were written by fourth-century Saints John Chrysostom and Basil the Great. 
 The Byzantine Rite uses leavened (instead of unleavened) bread for the Eucharist, and small pieces of the Host are placed into the chalice with the Precious Blood. Then, the laity receive the Body and Blood of Christ utilizing a small liturgical spoon. 
 Another distinction between Latin and Byzantine Catholics revolves around veneration. While Latin Catholics venerate the wood of the Cross on Good Friday, Byzantine Catholics venerate Christ’s burial shroud. In addition, Latin Catholics tend to venerate statues, while icons are venerated in the Byzantine tradition. 
 Alexandrian Rite 
 The Alexandrian Rite consists of two subgroups: Coptic and Ge’ez rites. Within these subgroups are three churches: 
 Coptic Catholic Church 
 Eritrean Catholic Church 
 Ethiopian Catholic Church 
 The Coptic Catholic Church traces its lineage back to Saint Mark the Evangelist, while Ethiopians claim that Saints Matthew and Bartholomew spread Christianity to their area. 
 Alexandrian Liturgical Traditions 
 The main distinction between the Coptic and Ge’ez rites is language. The Coptic Catholic Church uses Coptic and occasionally Arabic, while the Eritrean and Ethiopian Catholic Churches use Ge’ez. 
 One unique attribute to the Alexandrian Rite is when the liturgical year begins. Instead of Advent, it begins in late September with the Feast of the Cross. This feast commemorates Saint Helen’s finding of the True Cross. 
 Antiochene Rite (West Syria) 
 The ancient rite that blooms from West Syria, or Antioch, includes three churches: 
 Maronite Catholic Church 
 Syriac Catholic Church 
 Syro-Malankara Catholic Church 
 Antiochene Catholics trace their foundation to Saint Peter, who was Bishop of Antioch before he was Bishop of Rome. Therefore, patriarchs of the Maronite (which never split from Rome) and Syriac Churches are considered successors of Saint Peter, similar to bishops in the Latin Rite. 
 Antiochene Liturgical Traditions 
 All three of these churches use the West Syrian Rite in their liturgies. What differentiates them is language: 
 Maronite Catholic Church: Aramaic or Arabic 
 Syriac Catholic Church: Aramaic and Syriac 
 Syro-Malankara Catholic Church: Syriac, Malayalam, or English 
 The Mass, or liturgy, is called the Holy Qurbana, which translates to “holy sacrifice.  It is rich in symbolism, as well as symbolic gestures and language. 
 Armenian Rite 
 The only church within the Armenian Rite is the Armenian Catholic Church. It dates back to the fourth century, when Armenia was the first country to adopt Christianity as their state religion. 
 Armenian Liturgical Traditions 
 The Armenian Catholic Church uses the liturgy of Saint Gregory the Illuminator. He lived in the fourth century and first composed the Divine Liturgy (what Latin Catholics refer to as the Mass) in Syriac. 
 Similar to the Byzantines, when Armenians have an excess of bread that is not consecrated during the Divine Liturgy, this “blessed bread  (or antidoron) is given to the people after as a sign of fellowship. 
 Within the liturgical calendar, there are slightly different seasons. For example, the season equivalent to Advent is called Aratchavorats, which begins on the Feast of Christ the King and lasts six to eight weeks. 
 Chaldean Rite (East Syria) 
 The Chaldean Rite traces its origins back to Saint Thomas the Apostle, and they are endearingly called “Saint Thomas Christians.  Within this rite are two churches: 
 Chaldean Catholic Church 
 Syro-Malabar Catholic Church 
 While Chaldean Catholics have made their home in North America, they originally hail from India, Iraq, and other Middle Eastern countries. 
 Chaldean Liturgical Traditions 
 What sets the Chaldean Catholic churches apart is a red curtain that shrouds the sanctuary. Its significance traces back to the Jewish tradition of the Holy of Holies being separated by a veil, which was only accessed by the High Priest. The Chaldean curtain is similar to the iconostasis (screen of icons) in the Byzantine Rite and the communion rail in the Latin Rite. 
 All Eastern Churches refer to the Eucharistic Prayer as the anaphora, and the Chaldean Rite uses the oldest ones in the Catholic Church (Liturgy of Mar Addai and Mar Mari), which date back to the third century. The vernacular language is typically used in the anaphora, but Aramaic—the language of Jesus Christ—is also used. 
 Within the Chaldean liturgical calendar, there are nine seasons. They do not have Ordinary Time. However, they have Advent and the Great Fast (Lent). They honor the Feast of Saint Thomas the Apostle as a Holy Day of Obligation. 
 Just a Glimpse 
 This article only offers a glimpse into the six rites within the Catholic Church. However, it demonstrates the depth, richness, and beauty of our universal Church. The Catholic Church incorporates many unique cultures, traditions, and customs, and yet it is fully united in dogma and doctrine. 
 The Catholic Church holds in high esteem the institutions, liturgical rites, ecclesiastical traditions and the established standards of the Christian life of the Eastern Churches, for in them, distinguished as they are for their venerable antiquity, there remains conspicuous the tradition that has been handed down from the Apostles through the Fathers … // Pope Paul VI 
 To Learn More 
 If this aspect of Church history peaks your interest, continue exploring the various rites of the Catholic Church: 
 Visit an Eastern Rite Catholic Church in your area. 
 Study a helpful chart to see how the rites and churches relate to each other. 
 Listen to a podcast that gives a brief history of Eastern Catholic Churches, plus a beautiful lesson in Marian spirituality. 
 ABOUT Sarah Damm 
 Sarah Damm is a regular contributor to the BIS blog. She is a Catholic wife and mother of six children, living in Minnesota. She spends her days running errands, helping with homework, and keeping up with laundry and the family schedule. Sarah loves her faith, coffee, and good books. You can find out more about her here. 
 JOIN THE COMMUNITY 
 Reader Interactions 
 3 Comments 
 Though brief, these are beautiful explanations of the different rites in Catholicism! I am actually an eastern rite catholic myself (syro-malabar rite) so it’s inspiring to see more and more people learn about it. Thank you for writing this piece! 🙂 
 The graph chart showing how the different rites relate would not open. I would love to view that or a similar chart. This article was so very interesting. I would specially like to know more about the history of these rites and churches and each connection to the Apostles. I know there are some missing historical pieces that would prevent trading some of many of them. Thanks again for an excellent article. God bless 
 INFO 
 SOCIAL 
 This website uses cookies for analytical purposes. By choosing to continue, I’ll understand you agree with privacy policy + cookies policy 

 id="file23242772" filename="ritesrituals.shtml" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/rastafari/ritesrituals/ritesrituals.shtml">
 Rites of passage 
 On this page 
 Page options 
 Birth 
 When a child is born into the Rastafari tradition he or she is blessed by elders in the community, during a Nyabingi session of drumming, chanting and prayer. 
 Marriage 
 In Rastafari there is no formal marriage structure. A Rastafari man and woman who live together are regarded as husband and wife (unless, of course, they are related in some other way, such as mother and son). 
 If marriage does take place it is regarded as a social occasion rather than a religious event. 
 Death 
 In Rastafari there is no funeral ceremony to mark the end of life. 
 Rastafarians believe that reincarnation follows death, and that life is eternal. 
 BBC links 
 This page is best viewed in an up-to-date web browser with style sheets (CSS) enabled. While you will be able to view the content of this page in your current browser, you will not be able to get the full visual experience. Please consider upgrading your browser software or enabling style sheets (CSS) if you are able to do so. 

 id="file23242788" filename="role-religious-experience-theology" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.cbeinternational.org/resource/article/priscilla-papers-academic-journal/role-religious-experience-theology">
 This article is from the book, Foundations of Evangelical Theology (Baker, 1984) and is reprinted by permission. 
 It has been noted by many observers that the twentieth-century American sensibility is an experiential one. Feeling, emotion, “sensitivity,  self-awareness and “self-actualization,  “born-again  religion and self-help therapies—all in one way or another point toward the immediacy of personal experience. This experiential emphasis has influenced the character of American religion and theology in both its liberal and conservative expressions. Both the heritage of Puritan and revivalistic Christianity and the tradition of American philosophical pragmatism have tended to reinforce experience as an important dimension of American religious life. 
 In recent years experience has played a large role in the construction of various forms of liberation theology. According to James Cone, “There can be no black theology which does not take the black experience as a source for its starting point ; for black theology “the categories of interpretation must arise out of the thought forms of the black experience itself.  
 Related sentiments are voiced by feminist theologian Letty M. Russell. As an advocate of an inductive method she believes that Christian thinkers must draw out “the material for reflection from their life experiences as it relates to the gospel message.  The gospel is good news  only when it speaks concretely to their particular needs of liberation.  
 It is certainly the case that Christian theology must be situated or contextualized adequately in terms of the life experiences of the people whom it seeks to address. The danger in liberation theology, however, is that the contemporary context can come to dominate the biblical content, and in fact become a substitute for it. Concern for various forms of temporal liberation must not be allowed to displace the biblical insistence on the necessity of regeneration, the root of all lasting social transformation. 
 Another school of recent American theology, sometimes known as the new liberalism, is represented in the writings of David Tracy and Langdon Gilkey, both of the University of Chicago Divinity School. Like the older nineteenth-century liberalism of Schleiermacher it sees human experience as a basic source for the construction of Christian theology. According to Tracy, in his Blessed Rage for Order: The New Pluralism in Theology, the two principal sources for theology are the Christian texts and “common human experience and language.  Theology finds a point of contact in everyday and scientific language where the experience of “limits  signals a “religious dimension.  
 All theologies, of course, are influenced by “common human experience and language  as well as by Christian texts. The crucial question, however, is, which of the two influences is normative? Is the bottom line of authority the Bible or the modem mind? In Tracy’s case the modern sensibility seems clearly to have the upper hand. As a result, much of the content of historic Christian super-naturalism is jettisoned in the process. 
 In all cases the test of Christian belief is not to be experience, paranormal or otherwise, but conformity to the apostolic doctrine of scripture. The rule is sola scriptura. Other revelation claims are to be rejected; no new doctrines or morals are to be received. The spiritual counterfeits which are appearing today are somewhat reminiscent of the pagan claims faced by the early church. In the Hellenistic religious environment of the New Testament, claims of revelatory appearances of pagan gods such as Apollo, Zeus, Asclepius, and Sarapis were not uncommon. The worshipers of these pagan gods claimed to experience healings, and at times believed themselves commanded to build a shrine to the god in question. 
 According to the New Testament the reality of one’s relationship to the true God is not based on the intensity of subjective experience, but on abiding in the apostolic teaching. “What you have heard from the beginning, let that abide in you; if what you have heard from the beginning abides in you, you also will abide in the Son and in the Father  (1 John 2:24). Abiding in the doctrine means obedience to the commandments of God. “By this we know that we have come to know him, if we keep his commandments  (1 John 2:3). This emphasis on keeping the commandments is found in various forms twelve times in the Gospel of John and six times in 1 John. The message is clear: “By their fruits you shall know them  (Matt. 7:20). A true experience of God produces not anti-nomianism and a life of disobedience, but a life characterized by Christian grace and love. The Spirit of God points the believer to Jesus Christ (John 15:26); demonic spirits and fallen fleshly impulses draw attention to human personalities and leaders. 
 Theologies which appeal to experience as the highest norm open the door to heresy, moral anarchism, narcissism, and cultural impotence. Modernist theologies, ostensibly drawing from both scripture and the “modern sensibility  as sources, inevitably have given the latter veto power over the former. The result has been a reductionistic version of the faith which jettisons such historic biblical doctrines as the virgin birth, the substitutionary atonement, and the bodily resurrection—in the name of “credibility  and “relevance.  Such apologetic strategies have experienced repeated failure in their attempts to appease the demands of the “modem mind  and have frequently been little more than temporary stops on the road to a full-fledged secularism. 
 The chief end of man, as stated in the Westminster Shorter Catechism, is to “glorify God and to enjoy him forever.  Seeking the glory of God does have as its legitimate fruit the enjoyment of God, but the proper focus is on God, not on our personal experiences. Biblical religion is theocentric rather than anthropocentric in its fundamental orientation. 
 Get news, updates, and free resources 
 Sign up for our newsletter to receive our most up-to-date news, articles, and information 

 id="file23242639" filename="sacramentals-blessings" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.usccb.org/prayer-and-worship/sacraments-and-sacramentals/sacramentals-blessings">
 Sacramentals (Blessings) 
 Blessings are called "sacramentals" because they prepare us to receive the grace of the sacraments and help us to grow to be more like Christ (see Catechism of the Catholic Church, no. 1670). 
 Blessings consist of prayer, Scripture, and sometimes a special ritual sign (see Catechism of the Catholic Church, no. 1668). 
 People are accustomed to seeing bishops, priests, and deacons blessing objects or persons in the name of the Church. Indeed, "the more a blessing concerns ecclesial and sacramental life, the more is its administration reserved to the ordained ministry" (Catechism of the Catholic Church, no. 1669), often with the participation of the local parish community gathered in prayer. Whenever an ordained minister is present, he should be called upon to give the blessing. 
 However, there are other blessings, like the ones contained in Catholic Household Blessings and Prayers, that can be prayed by anyone who has been baptized, "in virtue of the universal priesthood, a dignity they possess because of their baptism and confirmation" (Book of Blessings, no. 18). The blessings given by laypersons are exercised because of their special office, such as parents on behalf of their children. 
 Right after telling his disciples to "love your enemies, do good to those who hate you," Jesus instructs them to "bless those who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you" (Lk 6:28). St. Paul echoes the Lord's command when he exhorts the Romans to "bless those who persecute [you], bless and do not curse them" (Rom 12:14). St. Peter urges that each time we are on the receiving end of evil, we should return "a blessing, because to this you were called, that you might inherit a blessing" (1 Pt 3:9). 
 This is why the Catechism of the Catholic Church tells us that "every baptized person is called to be a 'blessing,' and to bless" (no. 1669; see Gn 12:2; Lk 6:28; Rom 12:14; 1 Pt 3:9). 
 Like the Lord into whom they have been baptized, parents should bless and pray for their children. Each one of us should remember the sick and those who suffer. Each time we gather around the family table, we should bless God and the food he has given us. On special occasions, we will observe the traditions of the season, sanctifying by prayer and blessing all the seasons of grace that God has given to us. 

 id="file23242813" filename="Salvation" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salvation">
 Salvation 
 Salvation (from Latin: salvatio, from salva, 'safe, saved') is the state of being saved or protected from harm or a dire situation.[1] In religion and theology, salvation generally refers to the deliverance of the soul from sin and its consequences.[2][3] The academic study of salvation is called soteriology. 
 In Abrahamic religions and theology, salvation is the saving of the soul from sin and its consequences.[2] It may also be called deliverance or redemption from sin and its effects.[4] Depending on the religion or even denomination, salvation is considered to be caused either only by the grace of God (i.e. unmerited and unearned), or by faith, good deeds (works), or a combination thereof. Religions often emphasize that man is a sinner by nature and that the penalty of sin is death (physical death, spiritual death: spiritual separation from God and eternal punishment in hell). 
 Judaism holds that adherents do not need personal salvation as Christians believe. Jews do not subscribe to the doctrine of original sin.[7] Instead, they place a high value on individual morality as defined in the law of God—embodied in what Jews know as the Torah or The Law, given to Moses by God on biblical Mount Sinai. 
 In Judaism, salvation is closely related to the idea of redemption, a saving from the states or circumstances that destroy the value of human existence. God, as the universal spirit and Creator of the World, is the source of all salvation for humanity, provided an individual honours God by observing his precepts. So redemption or salvation depends on the individual. Judaism stresses that salvation cannot be obtained through anyone else or by just invoking a deity or believing in any outside power or influence.[8] 
 The Jewish concept of Messiah visualises the return of the prophet Elijah as the harbinger of one who will redeem the world from war and suffering, leading mankind to universal brotherhood under the fatherhood of one God. The Messiah is not considered as a future divine or supernatural being but as a dominating human influence in an age of universal peace, characterised by the spiritual regeneration of humanity. In Judaism, salvation is open to all people and not limited to those of the Jewish faith; the only important consideration being that the people must observe and practise the ethical pattern of behaviour as summarised in the Ten Commandments. When Jews refer to themselves as the chosen people of God, they do not imply they have been chosen for special favours and privileges but rather they have taken it upon themselves to show to all peoples by precept and example the ethical way of life.[8] 
 When examining Jewish intellectual sources throughout history, there is clearly a spectrum of opinions regarding death versus the afterlife. Possibly an over-simplification, one source says salvation can be achieved in the following manner: Live a holy and righteous life dedicated to Yahweh, the God of Creation. Fast, worship, and celebrate during the appropriate holidays.[9] By origin and nature, Judaism is an ethnic religion. Therefore, salvation has been primarily conceived in terms of the destiny of Israel as the elect people of Yahweh (often referred to as “the Lord ), the God of Israel.[6] 
 In the biblical text of Psalms, there is a description of death, when people go into the earth or the "realm of the dead" and cannot praise God. The first reference to resurrection is collective in Ezekiel's vision of the dry bones, when all the Israelites in exile will be resurrected. There is a reference to individual resurrection in the Book of Daniel.[10] It was not until the 2nd century BCE that there arose a belief in an afterlife, in which the dead would be resurrected and undergo divine judgment. Before that time, the individual had to be content that his posterity continued within the holy nation.[6] 
 The salvation of the individual Jew was connected to the salvation of the entire people. This belief stemmed directly from the teachings of the Torah. In the Torah, God taught his people sanctification of the individual. However, he also expected them to function together (spiritually) and be accountable to one another. The concept of salvation was tied to that of restoration for Israel.[11] 
 During the Second Temple Period, the Sadducees, High Priests, denied any particular existence of individuals after death because it wasn't written in the Torah, while the Pharisees, ancestors of the rabbis, affirmed both bodily resurrection and immortality of the soul, most likely based on the influence of Hellenistic ideas about body and soul and the Pharisaic belief in the Oral Torah. The Pharisees maintained that after death, the soul is connected to God until the messianic era when it is rejoined with the body in the land of Israel at the time of resurrection.[10] 
 Christianity's primary premise is that the incarnation and death of Jesus Christ formed the climax of a divine plan for humanity's salvation. This plan was conceived by God before the creation of the world, achieved at the cross, and it would be completed at the Last Judgment, when the Second Coming of Christ would mark the catastrophic end of the world.[12] 
 For Christianity, salvation is only possible through Jesus Christ. Christians believe that Jesus' death on the cross was the once-for-all sacrifice that atoned for the sin of humanity.[12] 
 The Christian religion, though not the exclusive possessor of the idea of redemption, has given to it a special definiteness and a dominant position. Taken in its widest sense, as deliverance from dangers and ills in general, most religions teach some form of it. It assumes an important position, however, only when the ills in question form part of a great system against which human power is helpless.[13] 
 According to Christian belief, sin as the human predicament is considered to be universal.[14] For example, in Romans 1:18-3:20 the Apostle Paul declared everyone to be under sin—Jew and Gentile alike. Salvation is made possible by the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus, which in the context of salvation is referred to as the "atonement".[15] Christian soteriology ranges from exclusive salvation[16]: p.123 to universal reconciliation[17] concepts. While some of the differences are as widespread as Christianity itself, the overwhelming majority agrees that salvation is made possible by the work of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, dying on the cross. 
 At the heart of Christian faith is the reality and hope of salvation in Jesus Christ. Christian faith is faith in the God of salvation revealed in Jesus of Nazareth. The Christian tradition has always equated this salvation with the transcendent, eschatological fulfillment of human existence in a life freed from sin, finitude, and mortality and united with the triune God. This is perhaps the non-negotiable item of Christian faith. What has been a matter of debate is the relation between salvation and our activities in the world. 
 — Anselm Kyongsuk Min, Dialectic of Salvation: Issues in Theology of Liberation (2009)[18]: p.79 
 The Bible presents salvation in the form of a story that describes the outworking of God's eternal plan to deal with the problem of human sin. The story is set against the background of the history of God's people and reaches its climax in the person and work of Christ. The Old Testament part of the story shows that people are sinners by nature, and describes a series of covenants by which God sets people free and makes promises to them. His plan includes the promise of blessing for all nations through Abraham and the redemption of Israel from every form of bondage. God showed his saving power throughout Israel's history, but he also spoke about a Messianic figure who would save all people from the power, guilt, and penalty of sin. This role was fulfilled by Jesus, who will ultimately destroy all the devil's work, including suffering, pain, and death. 
 A bumper sticker asking if one has found salvation 
 Salvation, according to most denominations, is believed to be a process that begins when a person first becomes a Christian, continues through that person's life, and is completed when they stand before Christ in judgment. Therefore, according to Catholic apologist James Akin, the faithful Christian can say in faith and hope, "I have been saved; I am being saved; and I will be saved."[19] 
 Christian salvation concepts are varied and complicated by certain theological concepts, traditional beliefs, and dogmas. Scripture is subject to individual and ecclesiastical interpretations. While some of the differences are as widespread as Christianity itself, the overwhelming majority agrees that salvation is made possible by the work of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, dying on the cross. 
 The purpose of salvation is debated, but in general most Christian theologians agree that God devised and implemented his plan of salvation because he loves them and regards human beings as his children. Since human existence on Earth is said to be "given to sin,"[Jn 8:34] salvation also has connotations that deal with the liberation[20] of human beings from sin, and the suffering associated with the punishment of sin—i.e., "the wages of sin are death."[Rom. 6:23] 
 Christians believe that salvation depends on the grace of God. Stagg writes that a fact assumed throughout the Bible is that humanity is in, "serious trouble from which we need deliverance…. The fact of sin as the human predicament is implied in the mission of Jesus, and it is explicitly affirmed in that connection." By its nature, salvation must answer to the plight of humankind as it actually is. Each individual's plight as sinner is the result of a fatal choice involving the whole person in bondage, guilt, estrangement, and death. Therefore, salvation must be concerned with the total person. "It must offer redemption from bondage, forgiveness for guilt, reconciliation for estrangement, renewal for the marred image of God."[21] 
 According to doctrine of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints]], the plan of salvation is God's plan to save, redeem, and exalt all humankind who chose, either in this life, or in the world of spirits of the dead, to accept the grace of Jesus Christ by exercising faith in Him, repenting of their sins, and by making and keeping sacred covenants (including baptism). Since the vast majority of God's children depart this life without that opportunity, Christ's gospel is preached to the unbelieving spirits in spirit prison (1 Peter 3: 19) so that they might be judged by the same standards as the living and live by following God in their spirit form (1 Peter 4: 6). If they accept Christ, sincerely repent of their sins, and accept ordinances done on their behalf, they can, by the grace of Christ, receive salvation on the same terms as the living. For this reason, members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints do vicarious work for the dead in sacred temples. The elements of this plan are drawn from various sources, including the Bible,[22] Book of Mormon, Doctrine & Covenants, Pearl of Great Price, and numerous statements made by the leadership of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). 
 In Islam, salvation refers to the eventual entrance to Paradise. Islam teaches that people who die disbelieving in God do not receive salvation. It also teaches that non-Muslims who die believing in God but disbelieving in His message (Islam), are left to His will. Those who die believing in the one God and His message (Islam) receive salvation.[23] 
 Narrated Anas, that Muhammad said: 
 Whoever said "None has the right to be worshipped but Allah" and has in his heart good (faith) equal to the weight of a barley grain will be taken out of Hell. And whoever said, "None has the right to be worshipped but Allah" and has in his heart good (faith) equal to the weight of a wheat grain will be taken out of Hell. And whoever said, "None has the right to be worshipped but Allah" and has in his heart good (faith) equal to the weight of an atom will be taken out of Hell. 
 Islam teaches that all who enter into Islam must remain so in order to receive salvation. 
 "If anyone desires a religion other than Islam (submission to Allah), never will it be accepted of him; and in the Hereafter He will be in the ranks of those who have lost (all spiritual good)." 
 For those who have not been granted Islam or to whom the message has not been brought:[24] 
 Those who believe (in the Qur'an), those who follow the Jewish (scriptures), and the Sabians and the Christians,- any who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and work righteousness,- on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve." 
 Belief in the “One God , also known as the Tawhid (التَوْحيدْ) in Arabic, consists of two parts (or principles): 
 Tawḥīdu r-Rubūbiyya (تَوْحيدُ الرُبوبِيَّة): Believing in the attributes of God and attributing them to no other but God. Such attributes include Creation, having no beginning, and having no end. These attributes are what make a God. Islam also teaches 99 names for God, and each of these names defines one attribute. One breaks this principle, for example, by believing in an Idol as an intercessor to God. The idol, in this case, is thought of having powers that only God should have, thereby breaking this part of Tawheed. No intercession is required to communicate with, or worship, God.[25] 
 Tawḥīdu l-'ulūhiyya (تَوْحيدُ الأُلوهيَّة): Directing worship, prayer, or deed to God, and God only. For example, worshiping an idol or any saint or prophet is also considered Shirk. 
 Islam also stresses that in order to gain salvation, one must also avoid sinning along with performing good deeds. Islam acknowledges the inclination of humanity towards sin.[26][27] Therefore, Muslims are constantly commanded to seek God's forgiveness and repent. Islam teaches that no one can gain salvation simply by virtue of their belief or deeds, instead it is the Mercy of God, which merits them salvation.[28] However, this repentance must not be used to sin any further. Islam teaches that God is Merciful. 
 Allah accepts the repentance of those who do evil in ignorance and repent soon afterwards; to them will Allah turn in mercy: For Allah is full of knowledge and wisdom. Of no effect is the repentance of those who continue to do evil, until death faces one of them, and he says, "Now have I repented indeed;" nor of those who die rejecting Faith: for them have We prepared a punishment most grievous. 
 Allah forgiveth not that partners should be set up with Him; but He forgiveth anything else, to whom He pleaseth; to set up partners with Allah is to devise a sin Most heinous indeed. 
 Islam describes a true believer to have Love of God and Fear of God. Islam also teaches that every person is responsible for their own sins. The Quran states; 
 If ye reject (Allah), truly Allah hath no need of you; but He liketh not ingratitude from His servants: if ye are grateful, He is pleased with you. No bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another. In the end, to your Lord is your Return, when He will tell you the truth of all that ye did (in this life). for He knoweth well all that is in (men's) hearts. 
 Al-Agharr al-Muzani, a companion of Mohammad, reported that Ibn 'Umar stated to him that Mohammad said, 
 O people, seek repentance from Allah. Verily, I seek repentance from Him a hundred times a day. 
 Sin in Islam is not a state, but an action (a bad deed); Islam teaches that a child is born sinless, regardless of the belief of his parents, dies a Muslim; he enters heaven, and does not enter hell.[32] 
 Narrated Aisha, that Mohammad said, "Do good deeds properly, sincerely and moderately, and receive good news because one's good deeds will not make him enter Paradise." They asked, "Even you, O Allah's Apostle?" He said, "Even I, unless and until Allah bestows His pardon and Mercy on me." 
 Islam is built on five principles, acts of worship that Islam teaches to be mandatory. Not performing the mandatory acts of worship may deprive Muslims of the chance of salvation.[33] According to Ibn 'Umar, Muhammad said that Islam is based on the following five principles:[34] 
 To testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and Muhammad is Allah's Apostle. 
 To pay Zakat to poor and needy (i.e. obligatory charity of 2.5% annually of surplus wealth). 
 Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism share certain key concepts, which are interpreted differently by different groups and individuals.[35] In these religions one is not liberated from sin and its consequences, but from the saṃsāra (cycle of rebirth) perpetuated by passions and delusions and its resulting karma.[36] They differ however on the exact nature of this liberation.[36] 
 Salvation is always self-attained in Dharmic traditions, and a more appropriate term would be moksha ('liberation')[36] or mukti ('release'). This state and the conditions considered necessary for its realization is described in early texts of Indian religion such as the Upanishads and the Pāli Canon, and later texts such the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali and the Vedanta tradition.[37] Moksha can be attained by sādhanā, literally 'means of accomplishing something'.[38] It includes a variety of disciplines, such as yoga and meditation. 
 Nirvana is the profound peace of mind that is acquired with moksha. In Buddhism and Jainism, it is the state of being free from suffering. In Hindu philosophy, it is union with the Brahman (Supreme Being). The word literally means 'blown out' (as in a candle) and refers, in the Buddhist context, to the blowing out of the fires of desire, aversion, and delusion,[39][40] and the imperturbable stillness of mind acquired thereafter.[39] 
 In Theravada Buddhism the emphasis is on one's own liberation from samsara.[40] The Mahayana traditions emphasize the bodhisattva path,[40] in which "each Buddha and Bodhisattva is a redeemer," assisting the Buddhist in seeking to achieve the redemptive state.[41] The assistance rendered is a form of self-sacrifice on the part of the teachers, who would presumably be able to achieve total detachment from worldly concerns, but have instead chosen to remain engaged in the material world to the degree that this is necessary to assist others in achieving such detachment.[41] 
 In Jainism, salvation, moksha, and nirvana are one and the same.[42][43] When a soul (atman) achieves moksha, it is released from the cycle of births and deaths, and achieves its pure self. It then becomes a siddha ('one who has accomplished his ultimate objective'). Attaining Moksha requires annihilation of all karmas, good and bad, because if karma is left, it must bear fruit. 
 ^ a b "Salvation." Oxford English Dictionary (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press. 1989. "The saving of the soul; the deliverance from sin and its consequences." 
 ^ Graves Jr., Wilfred. 2011. In Pursuit of Wholeness: Experiencing God's Salvation for the Total Person. Shippensburg, PA: Destiny Image. pp. 9, 22, 74–5. 
 ^ "Reb on the Web". Kolel: The Adult Centre for Liberal Jewish Learning. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved November 1, 2010. 
 ^ "How do I achieve salvation according to Judaism?""Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2013-07-04. Retrieved 2013-05-04.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Accessed: 4 May 2013 
 ^ a b Krell, Marc A. "Afterlife and Salvation". Religion Library: Judaism. [1] Accessed 4 May 2013 
 ^ Newman, Jay. 1982. Foundations of religious tolerance. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. ISBN 0-8020-5591-5 
 ^ Min, Anselm Kyongsuk. Dialectic of Salvation: Issues in Theology of Liberation. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1989. ISBN 978-0-88706-908-6 
 ^ Akin, James. October 2001. "The Salvation Controversy." Catholic Answers. 
 ^ Answering Islam: The Crescent in Light of the Cross, by Norman L. Geisler, Abdul Saleeb, p.128 [3] 
 ^ V. S. Apte. A Practical Sanskrit Dictionary. p. 979. 
 ^ a b Richard Gombrich, Theravada Buddhism: A Social History from Ancient Benāres to Modern Colombo. Routledge 
 ^ a b Joseph Edkins, Chinese Buddhism (1893), p. 364. 
 ^ Jaini, Padmanabh (2000). Collected Papers on Jaina Studies. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publ. ISBN 81-208-1691-9.: "Moksa and Nirvana are synonymous in Jainism". p.168 
 ^ Michael Carrithers, Caroline Humphrey (1991) The Assembly of listeners: Jains in society Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521365058: "Nirvana: A synonym for liberation, release, moksa." p.297 
 Braden, Charles Samuel (1941). Man's Quest for Salvation: An Historical and Comparative Study of the Idea of Salvation in the World's Great Living Religions. Chicago & New York: Willett, Clark & Company. 
 Brandon, S. G. F., ed. (1963). The Saviour God: Comparative studies in the concept of salvation presented to Edwin Oliver James by colleagues and friends. New York: Barnes & Noble. 
 Sherma, Rita D.; Sarma, Aravinda (2008), Hermeneutics and Hindu Thought: Toward a Fusion of Horizons, Springer 
 Snelling, John (1987), The Buddhist handbook. A Complete Guide to Buddhist Teaching and Practice, London: Century Paperbacks 
 Kumar, Santosh (2019), Salvation: In the Light of the Cross and the Crescent, Notion Press, ISBN 9781647604974 
 Redemption after Death by Charles Augustus Briggs: An article in the December 1889 Issue of The Magazine of Christian Literature Vol 1. No. 3. 

 id="file23242671" filename="Same-gender_Blessings_4.pdf" parent_folder="corpus" url="http://storage.cloversites.com/christchurch5/documents/Same-gender%20Blessings_4.pdf">
History, The Rite, Bishop’s Response, Going Forward

Introduction
 St. David’s Episcopal Church in Austin, TX

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DLWelEn_XgI

Controversy in the Church
Power of Liturgy
Lex Orandi, Lex Credendi
“The law of praying, shapes the law of believing. 

We work out our theology
in our liturgy.

History of Same Gender Blessings
 Blessing of Same Sex Relationships has been done in

various places for a long time as a pastoral response.
A variety of local liturgical experiments

History of Same Gender Episcopal
Legislation
General Convention 2003
Bishop Gene Robinson
General Convention 2006
All orders of ministry, bishops, priests, deacons
General Convention 2009
Develop a Rite for Blessing
General Convention 2012
The blessing rite passes; each bishop has
authority over its use

The Blessing Rite –
Theological Themes
A look at the introduction of the Rite:
The Concept of Covenant
Vocation
Households
Fruitfulness
Mutual Blessing

The Blessing Rite –
The Rite Itself
A look at the introduction of the Rite:
The Concept of Covenant
Similar Pattern to the Marriage Rite
 Introduction
 Consent
 Scripture
 Vow
 Blessings

Bishop’s response
 Our bishop, the Rt. Rev. Steven Miller, served on the

commission that designed the liturgy.
 He tries to use theological

and Biblical lenses to
make decisions.
Complicated in his views.
 Concealed carry, public-sector
 unions.

Bishop’s response
 Bishop’s response letter. His position paper before the

letter.
 Bishop said no to the blessing rite. “As much as I want in
my heart to be in favor of this proposed step, I can not
come to a place where I can agree that this rite is a
theologically sound development. 
 Bishop said yes:
 To civil marriage regardless of sexual orientation.
 Clergy taking couples to the diocese of Chicago
 Partnered gay and lesbian clergy being able to exercise their
ministry in the diocese

Bishop’s response – next steps
 Continue the process of listening, particularly from gay

and lesbian people.
 The bishop would like to offer some kind of pastoral

response, even if he can not currently endorse the
blessing rite as it now stands.
 The Sanding Committee of the Diocese has been asked

to gather feedback from the diocese and to make a
report to the bishop on how to proceed

Context
A view of the Episcopal Church
http://www.integrityusa.org/blessings-policies

Context
 Same Gender Blessings in the Anglican Communion
 Very few

Context
Same gender blessings in other Christian traditions
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Christian_deno
minational_positions_on_homosexuality

My own story (in brief)
Growing up
Seminary experience
 Personal relationships
 New ways to reflect on Biblical passages and the
theological tradition
Look forward to using the Rite

Resources (many more available)



http://rachelheldevans.com/blog/matthew-vines-video
One hour video and transcript of a committed, gay Christian, wrestling honestly with the Bible and Christian tradition.



Reasonable and Holy: Same Sexuality
Anglican priest examines same sex relationships in light of the Bible and Christian tradition



Homosexuality and the Bible: Two Views
Moral and Interpretive issues approached from different perspectives




"To Set Our Hope On Christ" -- .pdf version
Theological and Biblical reflections from Episcopal theologians.



"Without Form and Void" - by Kendall Harmon
A theological essay arguing against same-gender blessings



"True Union in the Body?" by Archbishop Drexel Gomez
A short book opposing same-gender blessings. We don't know of availability



"This Far by Grace" by Bishop Neil Alexander - Amazon page
A short book favoring same-gender blessings



"Letter to Louise" by Bruce Lowe
By a Baptist pastor from Arkansas - an affirming biblical study of homosexuality



"The Covenanting and Blessing of a Lifelong Union"
The rite we studied and approved in 2005-06; we used this rite until 2008



"The Covenanting and Blessing of a Lifelong Union" (08)
The adapted rite following Bishop Benfield's policies, 2008 -

for sale in book form.

Christ Church going forward
 Make room for different perspectives.

 Would like to

hear your stories.
 Questions?

 id="file23242691" filename="same-sex-catholic-blessing-rites-in-germany-why-talk-to-experts-on-both-sides-of-this-story" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.getreligion.org/getreligion/2021/5/12/same-sex-catholic-blessing-rites-in-germany-why-talk-to-experts-on-both-sides-of-this-story">
 Same-sex Catholic blessing rites in Germany: Why talk to experts on both sides of this story? 
 And this just in: Germany’s Catholic left proceeded with its planned same-sex blessing rites and, as you would expect (see previous GetReligion podcast and post on this topic), mainstream journalists were there to capture the details. 
 Sort of. 
 Actually, not so much. 
 The most important content — the precise wording of the blessing prayers, in doctrinal terms — appear to be Missing In Action. It’s possible that, as usual, journalists were not interested in the liturgical and doctrinal details. However, I could imagine a scenario in which journalists were asked by organizers to avoid that doctrinal content, with good cause. That material that will matter to canon lawyers. 
 Also, there was no need to look for content drawn from interviews with pro-Catechism Catholics who opposed the winds of change blowing in Germany. Clearly, this was a story with only one side that needed to be covered. Here is a key part of the Associated Press report written just before the main wave of events on May 10 (“German Catholics to bless gay unions despite Vatican ban ): 
 Germany is no stranger to schism: 500 years ago, Martin Luther launched the Reformation here. … 
 In Berlin, the Rev. Jan Korditschke, a Jesuit who works for the diocese preparing adults for baptism and helps out at the St. Canisius congregation, will lead blessings for queer couples at a worship service May 16. 
 “I am convinced that homosexual orientation is not bad, nor is homosexual love a sin,  Korditschke told The Associated Press in an interview Friday. “I want to celebrate the love of homosexuals with these blessings because the love of homosexuals is something good.  
 The 44-year-old said it is important that homosexuals can show themselves within the Catholic Church and gain more visibility long-term. He said he was not afraid of possible repercussions by high-ranking church officials or the Vatican. 
 “I stand behind what I am doing, though it is painful for me that I cannot do it in tune with the church leadership,  Korditschke said, adding that “the homophobia of my church makes me angry and I am ashamed of it.  
 This is, of course, essential content, and it was important that a few ordained participants spoke on the record. 
 However, note that this Jesuit speaks as if he truly expects the “repercussions by high-ranking church officials.  This implies that there are German Catholics — lay and ordained, perhaps — who opposed these vague, mysterious, unquoted rites. If so, it would have been good to have heard from them in a story that assumes their existence as doctrinal boogeypersons poised to pounce in the near future. 
 It's odd that @AP interviewed 2 people who were in support of this problematic idea, but didn't interview 1 theologian who had defended Church teaching on this matter. We aren't hiding: I was cited in the link below & would gladly explain things to AP. https://t.co/Qg567tcWme https://t.co/Cn8WWrKF1b 
 — Fr Matthew P. Schneider LC 🙏 (@FrMatthewLC) May 10, 2021 
 The Associated Press story is a perfect example of a trend that has only grown in the Internet age. 
 People on the left side of this drama get to speak for themselves (which is good). They are real people, you see, complete with ideas and emotions. However, Catholics who oppose these rites are, by definition, church officials who are best represented by pieces of digital paper. There is no need to speak to them or hear their answers to basic questions. 
 Perhaps they declined interviews? If that is the case, then it is best for journalists to say that. 
 But back to the AP story. Here is more essential information from, of course, the organizers of the event. 
 Germany’s powerful lay organization, the Central Committee of German Catholics, or ZdK, which has been advocating for gay blessings since 2015, positioned itself once more in favor of them. It called the contentious document from Rome “not very helpful  and explicitly expressed its support for  Love Wins.  
 “These are celebrations of worship in which people express to God what moves them,  Birgit Mock, the ZdK’s spokeswoman for family affairs, told the AP. 
 “The fact that they ask for God’s blessing and thank him for all the good in their lives — also for relationships lived with mutual respect and full of love — that is deeply based on the Gospel,  Mock said, adding that she herself was planning to attend a church service with gay blessings in the western city of Hamm on Monday in which she would pray for  the success of the synodal path in which we, as a church, recognize sexuality as a positive strength.  
 The “synodal path  reference, of course, refers to the wider agenda of German Catholic progressives who want to modernize Catholic doctrine on a number of other issues, such as the ordination of women. 
 Meanwhile, the New York Times report, with a Berlin dateline, covered basically the same territory using the same basic approach to reporting (“German Catholic Priests Defy Rome to Offer Blessings to Gay Couples ). Liberals are real people. Conservatives are pieces of (digital) paper, except for the nameless folks who are alleged to have called in unquoted death threats. 
 I did find this statement of fact — unattributed, of course — to be quite interesting: 
 The German church is among the most powerful and liberal in the world, and Roman Catholics everywhere were watching the response to the blessings for signals of how the church might respond to attempts at reform from those in the pews and from the priests who are often among those most active in finding ways to include gay men and lesbians in the church. 
 In what sense is the German church — with its plunging membership totals and rapidly thinning ranks of priests — one of the “most powerful  branches of Catholicism today? Is this academic and media clout, as opposed to the explosive growth of the church in Africa? And if we are talking about the high number of German (and European, in general) cardinals, is this a good thing or a remnant of a colonial era? 
 Once again, I kept looking for actual information about the nature of the rites themselves. What, precisely, is a “blessing ? Were were new prayers? Were individual couples blessed by name or were the blessings offered for a larger assembly of couples of various kinds? Read on: 
 The Rev. Bernd Mönkebüscher, pastor in the Church of St. Agnes in the western town of Hamm and one of the initiators of the campaign, said that every Valentine’s Day, his parish holds blessings for all couples, including those from same-sex unions and those who remarried after a divorce. 
 “We held a blessing service this Valentine’s Day, but it was important to us in view of this story from Rome to send a clear signal that the church must recognize, honor and appreciate life in all of its many colors,  said Father Mönkebüscher, who identifies as gay. “It is an important gesture toward those people who the church for years, if not decades, has viewed as second-class citizens.  … 
 During the ceremony, Father Mönkebüscher walked around the nave, approaching couples who sat in pairs, socially distanced and masked. They rose as he placed a hand on their shoulders and spoke a blessing as they bowed their heads. After one lesbian couple had received their blessing, they dropped their masks and shared a kiss, wiping away tears. 
 Once again, it appears that editors in the Times team were not interested in the religious and/or liturgical content of these rites. 
 The key: Participating couples were encouraged to move into a more private setting for individual blessing rites. The texts for these rites would be crucial, for those who care about doctrinal content. 
 This is very long, but it is packed with interesting details: 
 In many places, a general blessing was given at the end of the service, which, however, explicitly included homosexual couples and their relationships. Sometimes individual blessings were offered after the ceremony. 
 According to the organizers of a service at the Liebfrauenkirche in Frankfurt, “At the end of the Mass [...] Capuchin friars were available to all couples for personal blessings.  The church, dedicated to Mary, belongs to the Diocese of Limburg, led by Bishop Georg Bätzing, chairman of the German bishops’ conference. 
 In the Augustinian Church in Würzburg, too, all couples — expressly including same-sex couples — were invited to “come and get  the individual blessing in a backroom after the service. 
 The order of service varied from place to place. A participant who attended the blessing ceremony in Cologne told CNA Deutsch that the ceremony was like a “political event.  The event was led by a female pastoral counselor in liturgical robes, who explained that she had already quit her church service. 
 After some political statements, the Gospel was read aloud, followed by a speech. Finally, the song Imagine by John Lennon was played. 
 Keep reading, noting especially the statements that the blessings are nothing new. 
 At the Würzburg youth church, an organizer spoke about the “anger and sadness  that had prevailed since the Vatican intervention. A temporary “wall  was set up in the sanctuary, and participants were asked to write down “everything that upsets you  and place their writing on the wall. 
 The Church should not presume to define what love is, the organizer commented: “Love is not a sin; we are all blessed, fundamentally. Let us build on that.  
 At the same time, in the nearby Augustinian Church, the priest emphasized that God’s blessing belongs to “all people.  
 “We can’t help but bless,  the priest continued, adding that those who blessed same-sex partnerships were following their consciences. 
 Würzburg student pastor Father Burkard Hose confirmed in his address during the blessing ceremony that in the past many people had been blessed “in secret.  
 “We will continue to do this,  he said, adding: “The Church does not have the authority to withhold blessings.  
 Several German bishops have previously spoken in favor of blessings for homosexual unions, including Bishop Georg Bätzing of Limburg, Bishop Franz-Josef Overbeck of Essen, Bishop Helmut Dieser of Aachen, Cardinal Reinhard Marx of Munich and Freising, Bishop Franz-Josef Bode of Osnabrück, Bishop Peter Kohlgraf of Mainz and Bishop Heinrich Timmerevers of Dresden-Meissen. 
 CNA Deutsch reported that the bishop of Essen said in an interview last month that he would “not suspend a priest in his diocese or impose other Church penalties on him  if the cleric blessed same-sex couples. The Essen Diocese recently hosted an event declaring that same-sex blessings were a matter of “not if, but how.  
 I will end by restating my basic question: Liturgically speaking, what is a “blessing ? What is the doctrinal content of this vague, mysterious rite? 
 With that in mind, here is one final quote from the CNA report: 
 Helmut Hoping, a professor of dogmatic theology at the University of Freiburg, told CNA Deutsch that some of the priests conducting blessings “also openly advocate opening the sacrament of marriage to same-sex couples in the medium term.  

 id="file23242591" filename="sending-forth-liturgy-2020.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.bc.edu/bc-web/bcnews/faith-religion/ministry/sending-forth-liturgy-2020.html">
 Sending Forth 
 The School of Theology and Ministry's annual blessing for graduating students is reimagined due to the coronavirus 
 Gary Wayne Gilbert 
 An annual end-of-the-academic-year tradition at the School of Theology and Ministry is its Rite of Sending Forth. The STM community, which gathers together every Thursday for Mass, includes in its final Thursday Mass of the school year a recognition of and blessing for the graduating students who are being sent forth to serve the Church. 
 Massachusetts’s stay-at-home advisory and the suspension of in-person Masses in response to COVID-19 altered—but did not deter—STM’s recognition of graduating students in this special way. 
 School of Theology and Ministry Dean Thomas D. Stegman, S.J., at left, and Deacon David Romero, S.J., led the worship via Zoom. 
 Members of the entire STM community joined online for the 2020 Rite of Sending Forth to celebrate the 120 graduating students who will be serving as ordained and lay ecclesial ministers in the Church, teachers, scholars, counselors, and social workers, among other roles. 
 STM Dean Thomas D. Stegman, S.J., led the virtual closing liturgy from the Faber Jesuit Community chapel, accompanied by Deacon David Romero, S.J., from the Class of 2020. Singers for the liturgy were graduating students Matthew Stewart, S.J., and Vanessa Miranda. 
 "Undeniably Zoom presents many challenges, but moments like the liturgy highlight something else for me—an intimacy as people welcome one another into their homes to pray together," said Sam Scheidt, who graduated with a master of theological studies. "I felt a wave of emotion from the moment that I saw everyone's faces start to populate across my screen." 
 "Being connected with the students and faculty in the STM community at the Sending Forth liturgy, even if only virtually, helped bring some closure to a challenging year," added Kelly Clark, who graduated with a master of arts in theology and ministry. "I thought the liturgy was prayerful and meaningful, something that can be difficult to achieve in a remote environment. Dean Stegman's reflection acknowledged the accomplishments of the graduating class with a sense of pride, encouraging us to continue our educational and ministerial pursuits with prayer and humility. His gentle reminder has stayed with me:'you can't give what you haven't received.'" 
 Jacqueline Regan 
 For Scheidt, the most poignant part of the liturgy was the music. 
 "I love music, and I did not realize how much I missed singing in a community until we were doing it together—muted, in our own homes," Scheidt said. "Listening to the music from our cantor, watching the animated—though silent—community of singers, I felt a familiar surge of community." 
 "Liturgy is part of the fabric of the STM," said Jacqueline Regan, associate dean for Student Affairs and Career Services. "After the move to remote instruction in March, we continued to offer daily written scriptural reflections as a way for our community to remain united in prayer. We especially appreciated the opportunity to come together virtually and bless our graduating students. This liturgy proved to be a powerful reminder of the importance of ritual in our lives." 
 For graduating students, the Rite of Sending Forth provided a final moment to enjoy the sense of community STM has cultivated throughout their time at BC. 
 "I will never forget the community at the STM," said Scheidt, who served as a co-leader of the STM Interreligious Engagement Group. "The faculty, staff, and students at the STM bring life to the top-notch theological education. I know that I will miss many aspects of my time at the STM, but I will miss especially the times when the community came together to share gifts with one another: liturgy, Night of the Arts, STM Dialogues, trivia with Fr. [Professor of Systematic Theology and Professor Ordinarius Richard] Lennan, and many more." 
 For Clark, director of music ministry for the St. Anne-St. Catherine Collaborative Faith Community in Littleton and Westford, Mass., and a self-described "older student," the STM brought her in contact with millennials "whose zeal for ministry, justice, and faith brings a fire of hope to our church and weary world." 
 Clark praised her fellow students and the STM faculty for bringing her a global experience and understanding of the Church. "I've very much enjoyed the perspectives of lay and religious students from throughout the world in my classroom encounters. The STM faculty especially brings a wealth of voices to their syllabi, adding diverse and imaginative perspectives to their subject areas." 
 She added that "the STM has consistently called out social injustice, addressing oppressive systems through dialogue, prayer, and action. This is a model that I will take with me into my professional circles." 
 This fall, Scheidt will teach religion and serve as a campus minister at Fontbonne Hall Academy in Brooklyn. “I remain inspired by all of the good people that I met at BC, and I hope to enrich others in the same way that those at BC enriched me.  
 Kathleen Sullivan | University Communications | June 2020 
 Related links 
 Blessing for Graduates 
 God of life and of love, you have given us Jesus to lead us on our journey so that we might not walk in darkness, but may have the light of life. For every good grace of these past years, we thank you. 
 Pour out your blessings upon our sisters and brothers who have completed this stage of their journeys at the School of Theology and Ministry. 
 As they go forth to be ministers, teachers, scholars, and witnesses of the Gospel throughout the world, may they continue to be nourished and continue to grow. 
 May their hearts be filled with mercy and sealed with peace. May they be ever aware of how deeply they are loved. May they be agents of healing and reconciliation in your weary world. May they see the face of Christ in everyone they meet, and may everyone they meet see the face of Christ in them. 
 Holy Spirit, ignite their hearts with passion for setting the world aflame with your love. Empower them to stand for true justice, to be in solidarity with all who suffer, to teach by word and example, and to grow ever closer to you. Grant this through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen. 

 id="file23242632" filename="Sign_of_the_cross" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sign_of_the_cross">
 Position of the fingers while making the sign of the cross as currently preserved in the Byzantine Rite although historically also found in the western tradition.[1] 
 Making the sign of the cross (Latin: signum crucis), or blessing oneself or crossing oneself, is a ritual blessing made by members of some branches of Christianity. This blessing is made by the tracing of an upright cross or + across the body with the right hand, often accompanied by spoken or mental recitation of the Trinitarian formula: "In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen."[2] 
 Many individuals use the expression "cross my heart and hope to die" as an oath, making the sign of the cross, in order to show "truthfulness and sincerity", sworn before God, in both personal and legal situations.[4] 
 The sign of the cross was originally made in some parts of the Christian world with the right-hand thumb across the forehead only.[5] In other parts of the early Christian world it was done with the whole hand or with two fingers.[6] Around the year 200 in Carthage (modern Tunisia, Africa), Tertullian wrote: "We Christians wear out our foreheads with the sign of the cross."[7] Vestiges of this early variant of the practice remain: in the Roman Rite of the Mass in the Catholic Church, the celebrant makes this gesture on the Gospel book, on his lips, and on his heart at the proclamation of the Gospel;[5] on Ash Wednesday a cross is traced in ashes on the forehead; chrism is applied, among places on the body, on the forehead for the Holy Mystery of Chrismation in the Eastern Orthodox Church.[5] 
 Orthodox Christians (among them then-president of Russia Dmitry Medvedev) making the sign of the cross at the funeral of Patriarch Alexy II 
 Using five open fingers is the most common method by Western Christians, although other forms are sometimes used. The five fingers are often said to represent the Five Wounds of Christ.[8] This symbolism was adopted after the more ancient gesture of two or three fingers was simplified. The West employs the "Small Sign of the Cross" (+), using only the thumb: The priest or deacon, while announcing the Gospel text, "makes the Sign of the Cross on the book and on his forehead, lips, and breast. The people acclaim: 'Glory to you, O Lord'."[9] Some in the congregation have taken to imitating the celebrant. The Small Sign is also used during the majority of the Sacraments. 
 In the Eastern Orthodox and Byzantine Catholic churches, the tips of the first three fingers (the thumb, index, and middle ones) are brought together, and the last two (the "ring" and little fingers) are pressed against the palm. The first three fingers express one's faith in the Trinity, while the remaining two fingers represent the two natures of Jesus, divine and human.[10] 
 Western Christians, including Roman Catholics and Protestants, as well as the Oriental Orthodox (Armenians, Copts, Ethiopians, etc.), touch the left shoulder before the right[11][12][13] while Byzantine Rite Christians touch the right shoulder before the left. 
 The sign of the cross is made by touching the hand sequentially to the forehead, lower chest or stomach, and both shoulders, accompanied by the Trinitarian formula: at the forehead In the name of the Father (or In nomine Patris in Latin); at the stomach or heart and of the Son (et Filii); across the shoulders and of the Holy Spirit/Ghost (et Spiritus Sancti); and finally: Amen.[14] 
 There are several interpretations, according to Church Fathers:[15] the forehead symbolizes Heaven; the solar plexus (or top of stomach), the earth; the shoulders, the place and sign of power. It also recalls both the Trinity and the Incarnation. Pope Innocent III (1198–1216) explained: "The sign of the cross is made with three fingers, because the signing is done together with the invocation of the Trinity. ... This is how it is done: from above to below, and from the right to the left, because Christ descended from the heavens to the earth..."[8][16] 
 There are some variations: for example a person may first place the right hand in holy water. After moving the hand from one shoulder to the other, it may be returned to the top of the stomach. It may also be accompanied by the recitation of a prayer (e.g., the Jesus Prayer, or simply "Lord have mercy"). In some Catholic regions, like Spain, Italy and Latin America, it is customary to form a cross with the index finger and thumb and then to kiss one's thumb at the conclusion of the gesture,[17] while in the Philippines, this extra step evolved into the thumb quickly touching the chin or lower lip. Ending the sign of the cross some place the right open hand upon the other (the left open hand), with all the five fingers, like in a prayer, till the height of the face. 
 Many have been crucified throughout the world, but by none of these are the devils scared; but when they see even the Sign of the Cross of Christ, who was crucified for us, they shudder. For those men died for their own sins, but Christ for the sins of others; for He did no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth. It is not Peter who says this, for then we might suspect that he was partial to his Teacher; but it is Esaias who says it, who was not indeed present with Him in the flesh, but in the Spirit foresaw His coming in the flesh.[19] 
 For others only hear, but we both see and handle. Let none be weary; take your armour against the adversaries in the cause of the Cross itself; set up the faith of the Cross as a trophy against the gainsayers. For when you are going to dispute with unbelievers concerning the Cross of Christ, first make with your hand the sign of Christ's Cross, and the gainsayer will be silenced. Be not ashamed to confess the Cross; for Angels glory in it, saying, We know whom you seek, Jesus the Crucified. Matthew 28:5 Might you not say, O Angel, I know whom you seek, my Master? But, I, he says with boldness, I know the Crucified. For the Cross is a Crown, not a dishonour.[19] 
 Let us not then be ashamed to confess the Crucified. Be the Cross our seal made with boldness by our fingers on our brow, and on everything; over the bread we eat, and the cups we drink; in our comings in, and goings out; before our sleep, when we lie down and when we rise up; when we are in the way, and when we are still. Great is that preservative; it is without price, for the sake of the poor; without toil, for the sick; since also its grace is from God. It is the Sign of the faithful, and the dread of devils: for He triumphed over them in it, having made a show of them openly Colossians 2:15; for when they see the Cross they are reminded of the Crucified; they are afraid of Him, who bruised the heads of the dragon. Despise not the Seal, because of the freeness of the gift; out for this the rather honour your Benefactor.[19] 
 Moreover we worship even the image of the precious and life-giving Cross, although made of another tree, not honouring the tree (God forbid) but the image as a symbol of Christ. For He said to His disciples, admonishing them, Then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in Heaven Matthew 24:30, meaning the Cross. And so also the angel of the resurrection said to the woman, You seek Jesus of Nazareth which was crucified. Mark 16:6 And the Apostle said, We preach Christ crucified. 1 Corinthians 1:23 For there are many Christs and many Jesuses, but one crucified. He does not say speared but crucified. It behooves us, then, to worship the sign of Christ. For wherever the sign may be, there also will He be. But it does not behoove us to worship the material of which the image of the Cross is composed, even though it be gold or precious stones, after it is destroyed, if that should happen. Everything, therefore, that is dedicated to God we worship, conferring the adoration on Him.[21] 
 Herbert Thurston indicates that at one time both Eastern and Western Christians moved the hand from the right shoulder to the left. German theologian Valentin Thalhofer thought writings quoted in support of this point, such as that of Innocent III, refer to the small cross made upon the forehead or external objects, in which the hand moves naturally from right to left, and not the big cross made from shoulder to shoulder.[5] Andreas Andreopoulos, author of The Sign of the Cross, gives a more detailed description of the development and the symbolism of the placement of the fingers and the direction of the movement.[22] 
 Today, Western Christians (including Catholics and Protestants) and the Oriental Orthodox touch the left shoulder before the right. Eastern Orthodox Christians and Byzantine Rite Catholics use the right-to-left movement. 
 The sign of the cross may be made by individuals upon themselves as a form of prayer and by clergy upon others or objects as an act of blessing. The gesture of blessing is certainly related to the sign of the cross, but the two gestures developed independently after some point. In Eastern Christianity, the two gestures differ significantly. Priests and deacons are allowed to bless using the right hand, while bishops may bless simultaneously with both, the left mirroring the right. Individuals may make it at any time, clergy must make it at specific times (as in liturgies), and it is customary to make it on other occasions. 
 Although the sign of the cross dates to ante-Nicene Christianity, it was rejected by some of the Reformers and is absent from some forms of Protestantism. It was commended and retained by Martin Luther and remains in use by Lutheran clergy, but its use is not universal by the laity. In Anglicanism, its use was revived by the Oxford Movement and is fairly common. It is required by the Book of Common Prayer for the priest to use it when administering Baptism and this was codified by the canon law of the Church of England in 1604. In the Reformed tradition, such as Presbyterianism, especially the mainline Presbyterian, its use would be during baptism, communion, confirmation, benedictions and sometimes with the creeds. Ministers and some laity in Methodism, on very rare occasions, will use it. Other Protestants and Restorationist Christians do not use it all. 
 Some, particularly Roman Catholics and Eastern Christians, might make the sign of the cross in response to perceived blasphemy. Others sign themselves to seek God's blessing before or during an event with uncertain outcome. In Hispanic countries, people often sign themselves in public, such as athletes who cross themselves before entering the field or while concentrating for competition. 
 The sign of the cross is a prayer, a blessing, and a sacramental. As a sacramental, it prepares an individual to receive grace and disposes one to cooperate with it.[23] The Christian begins the day, prayers, and activities with the Sign of the Cross: "In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. Amen." In this way, a person dedicates the day to God and calls on God for strength in temptations and difficulties.[24] John Vianney said a genuinely made Sign of the Cross "makes all hell tremble."[25] 
 In the Roman or Latin Rite Church it is customary to make the full Sign of the Cross using holy water when entering a church. The first three fingers of the right hand are dipped into the font containing the holy water and the Sign of the Cross is made on oneself. This gesture has a two-fold purpose: to remind one of one's baptism and the rights and responsibilities that go with it and to also remind one that one is entering a sacred place that is set apart from the world outside.[26] 
 Roman Catholicism draws a distinction between liturgical and non-liturgical use of the sign of the cross. The sign of the cross is expected at two points of the Mass: the laity sign themselves during the introductory greeting of the service and at the final blessing; optionally, other times during the Mass when the laity often cross themselves are during a blessing with holy water, when concluding the penitential rite, in imitation of the priest before the Gospel reading (small signs on forehead, lips, and heart), and perhaps at other times out of private devotion. In the ordinary form of the Roman Rite the priest signs the bread and wine at the epiclesis before the consecration. In the Tridentine Mass the priest signs the bread and wine 25 times during the Canon of the Mass, ten times before and fifteen times after they have been consecrated. The priest also uses the sign of the cross when blessing a deacon before the deacon reads the Gospel, when sending an Extraordinary Minister of Holy Communion to take the Eucharist to the sick (after Communion, but before the end of the Mass), and when blessing the congregation at the conclusion of the Mass. 
 Ordained bishops, priests and deacons have more empowerment to bless objects and other people. While lay people may preside at certain blessings, the more a blessing is concerned with ecclesial or sacramental matters, the more it is reserved to clergy.[27] Extraordinary Ministers of Holy Communion do not ordinarily have a commission to bless in the name of the Church, as priests and deacons do. At this point in the liturgy, their specific function is to assist the clergy in the distribution of holy Communion.[28] Extraordinary Ministers of Communion blessing those who do not wish to or cannot receive communion can speak or raise the hand but not make the sign of the cross over the person.[29] 
 A priest or deacon blesses an object or person with a single sign of the cross, but a bishop blesses with a triple sign of the cross. In the Catholic organization the Legion of Mary, members doing door-to-door parish surveys bless the homes of those not home by tracing the sign of the cross on the door.[30] 
 Position of the fingers while making the sign of the cross as currently preserved in the Eastern Orthodox Church although also found in the western tradition[1] 
 In the Eastern traditions, both celebrant and congregation make the sign of the cross quite frequently. It is customary in some Eastern traditions to cross oneself at each petition in a litany and to closely associate oneself with a particular intention being prayed for or with a saint being named. The sign of the cross is also made upon entering or leaving a church building, at the start and end of personal prayer, when passing the main altar (which represents Christ), whenever all three persons of the Trinity are addressed, and when approaching an icon. 
 Position of an Eastern Orthodox priest's fingers when blessing 
 When an Eastern Orthodox or Byzantine Catholic bishop or priest blesses with the sign of the cross, he holds the fingers of his right hand in such a way that they form the Greek abbreviation for Jesus Christ "IC XC". The index finger is extended to make the "I"; the middle finger signify letter "C"; the thumb touches the lowered third finger to signify the "X" and the little finger also signifies the letter "C".[31] 
 When a priest blesses in the sign of the cross, he positions the fingers of his right hand in the manner described as he raises his right hand, then moves his hand downwards, then to his left, then to his right. A bishop blesses with both hands (unless he is holding some sacred object such as a cross, chalice, Gospel Book, icon, etc.), holding the fingers of both hands in the same configuration, but when he moves his right hand to the left, he simultaneously moves his left hand to the right, so that the two hands cross, the left in front of the right, and then the right in front of the left. The blessing of both priests and bishops consists of three movements, in honour of the Holy Trinity. 
 Position of the fingers while making the sign of the cross as currently preserved by the Old Believers although originating in the Antiochian Tradition.[32] 
 In Russia, until the reforms of Patriarch Nikon in the 17th century, it was customary to make the sign of the cross with two fingers (symbolising the dual nature of Christ). The enforcement of the three-finger sign was one of the reasons for the schism with the Old Believers whose congregations continue to use the two-finger sign of the cross. 
 Among Lutherans the practice was widely retained. For example, Luther's Small Catechism states that it is expected before the morning and evening prayers. Lutheranism never abandoned the practice of making the sign of the cross in principle and it was commonly retained in worship at least until the early 19th century. During the 19th and early 20th centuries it was largely in disuse until the liturgical renewal movement of the 1950s and 1960s. One exception is The Lutheran Hymnal (1941) of the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod (LCMS), which states that "The sign of the cross may be made at the Trinitarian Invocation and at the words of the Nicene Creed 'and the life of the world to come.'"[33] Since then, the sign of the cross has become fairly commonplace among Lutherans at worship. The sign of the cross is now customary in the Divine Service.[34][35] Rubrics in contemporary Lutheran worship manuals, including Evangelical Lutheran Worship of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America and Lutheran Service Book used by LCMS and Lutheran Church–Canada, provide for making the sign of the cross at certain points in the liturgy.[36][37] Places approximate the Roman Catholic practice: at the Trinitarian formula, the benediction, at the consecration of the Eucharist, and following reciting the Nicene or Apostles' Creed. 
 Devotional use of the sign of the cross among Lutherans also includes after receiving the Host and Chalice in the Eucharist, following Holy Absolution; similarly, they may dip their hands in the baptismal font and make the sign of the cross upon entering the church. 
 The sign of the cross can be found in the Methodist liturgy of the United Methodist Church. It is made by some clergy during the Great Thanksgiving, Confession of Sin and Pardon, and benediction.[38][39][40] John Wesley, the principal leader of the early Methodists, prepared a revision of The Book of Common Prayer for Methodist use, called The Sunday Service of the Methodists in North America, which instructs the presiding minister to make the sign of the cross on the forehead of children just after they have been baptized.[41] Making the sign of the cross at baptism is retained in the current Book of Worship of The United Methodist Church, and is widely practiced (sometimes with oil).[42] Furthermore, on Ash Wednesday the sign of the cross is almost always applied by the elder to the foreheads of the laity.[43] The liturgy for healing and wholeness, which is becoming more commonly practiced, calls for the pastor to make the sign of the cross with oil upon the foreheads of those seeking healing.[44] 
 Whether or not a Methodist uses the sign for private prayer is a personal choice, but it is encouraged by the bishops of the United Methodist Church.[39] Some United Methodists also perform the sign before and after receiving Holy Communion, and some ministers also perform the sign when blessing the congregation at the end of the sermon or service.[45] 
 In some Reformed churches, such as the PCUSA and the Cumberland Presbyterian Church, Presbyterian Church in America, the sign of the cross is used on the foreheads during baptism[46] or during an Ash Wednesday service when ashes are imposed on the forehead. The sign of the cross is on rare occasions used during Communion and during the Confession of Sin and the Creeds. In instances during a Benediction, when the minister concludes the service using the Trinitarian blessing, a hand is extended and a sign of the cross is made out toward the congregation, but this is also quite rare.[citation needed] 
 It is common practice in the Armenian Apostolic Church to make the sign of the cross when entering or passing a church, during the start of service and at many times during Divine Liturgy. The motion is performed by joining the first three fingers, to symbolize the Holy Trinity, and putting the two other fingers in the palm, then touching one's forehead, below the chest, left side, then right side and finishing with open hand on the chest again with bowing head.[47][48] 
 ^ Ayto, John (8 July 2010). Oxford Dictionary of English Idioms. Oxford University Press. p. 79. ISBN 9780199543786. 
 ^ Andreas Andreopoulos, The Sign of the Cross, Paraclete Press, 2006, ISBN 978-1-55725-496-2, p. 24. 
 ^ Sullivan, John F., The Externals of the Catholic Church, P.J. Kenedy & Sons (1918) 
 ^ Prayer Book, edited by the Romanian Orthodox Church, several editions (Carte de rugăciuni - Editura Institutului biblic şi de misiune al Bisericii ortodoxe române, 2005), 
 ^ "Est autem signum crucis tribus digitis exprimendum, quia sub invocatione Trinitatis imprimitur, de qua dicit propheta: Quis appendit tribus digitis molem terrae? (Isa. XL.) ita quod a superiori descendat in inferius, et a dextra transeat ad sinistram, quia Christus de coelo descendit in terram, et a Judaeis transivit ad gentes. Quidam tamen signum crucis a sinistra producunt in dextram; quia de miseria transire debemus ad gloriam, sicut et Christus transivit de morte ad vitam, et de inferno ad paradisum, praesertim ut seipsos et alios uno eodemque pariter modo consignent. Constat autem quod cum super alios signum crucis imprimimus, ipsos a sinistris consignamus in dextram. Verum si diligenter attendas, etiam super alios signum crucis a dextra producimus in sinistram, quia non consignamus eos quasi vertentes dorsum, sed quasi faciem praesentantes." (Innocentius III, De sacro altaris mysterio, II, xlv in Patrologia Latina 217, 825C--D.) 
 ^ Patricia Ann Kasten, Linking Your Beads: The Rosary's History, Mysteries, and Prayers, Our Sunday Visitor 2011, p. 34 
 ^ Mark W. Elliott, Thomas C. Oden. Isaiah 40-66. Intervarsity Press (2007): p. 335 
 ^ a b c Cyril of Jerusalem. Catechetical Lecture 13. [1] 
 ^ Steven A. McKinion, Thomas C. Oden. Isaiah 1-39. Intervarsity Press (2004): p. 279 
 ^ John of Damascus. An Exposition of the Orthodox Faith, Vol. 4 [2] 
 ^ Andreas Andreopoulos, The Sign of the Cross, Paraclete Press, 2006, ISBN 978-1-55725-496-2, pp. 11–42. 
 ^ "Sign of the Cross". Lutheran Church - Missouri Synod. Archived from the original on 20 September 2005. Retrieved 12 September 2007. 
 ^ John Wesley's Prayer Book: The Sunday Service of the Methodists in North America with introduction, notes, and commentary by James F. White, 1991 OSL Publications, Akron, Ohio, page 142. 
 ^ The United Methodist Book of Worship, Nashville 1992, p. 91 
 ^ The United Methodist Book of Worship, Nashville 1992, p. 323. 
 ^ The United Methodist Book of Worship, Nashville 1992, p. 620. 
 ^ Understanding Baptism, First Presbyterian Church of Crestview and Laurel Hill, Florida. 

 id="file23242604" filename="stop-saying-god-bless-you" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://redeeminggod.com/stop-saying-god-bless-you/">
 Stop Saying “God Bless You  
 One of my pet peeves is how some Christians use “God Bless you  as a sort of greeting and salutation. This is how the conversations often go: 
 [We talk about something…] 
 Me: Well, I gotta run. 
 Christian: Okay! God bless you! 
 I know. I know. They want me to say, “God bless you  back. But I don’t do that. (I might say “Bless you  after someone sneezes, but that is something I learned from my wife… which I heard goes back to some old wive’s tale about losing part of your brain when you sneeze…) 
 How Do You Respond When People say “God Bless You ? 
 When someone says, “God bless you,  what I want to say is: “He has. And He’s blessed you too. So let’s stop talking like religious nuts and have a conversation like normal people.  
 I mean look, if you only say God bless you because you want someone to say God bless you back, is that really going to be much of a blessing for either of us? 
 Also, can we really call down the blessing of God upon our lives by appending every conversation with the words “God bless you ? 
 I always wonder if men who say this greet their wife and kids the same way when they leave for work or get home in the evening. “I’m leaving for work! God bless you!  or “Honey, I’m home! God bless you!  I really doubt it. But then, since I’m not a “God bless you  sayer, I don’t really know what happens in “God bless you  homes. 
 God Bless You and Other Christian Lingo 
 Worse yet are the conversations that not only begin and end with “God bless you  statements, but are also full of statements like, “What a blessing! …An answer to prayer! …God is so good. …That just blesses my heart. …Oh, bless your soul! …Praise Jesus! …Amen!  
 I am not much of a conversationalist, but my conversations with people like this usually end much quicker than normal. I have written about this before in a post called “This Video Really Spoke to My Heart.  
 Maybe this is just the “overcritical me  coming out to snarl at the super-spiritual Christians again. If so, I’m sorry. 
 But what about you? Do you say, “God bless you ? Why or why not? Am I making too much of this? (Probably so) 
 Learn the most essential truths for following Jesus! 
 Get FREE articles and audio teachings every week in my discipleship emails! 
 I don’t say it, and I find it awkward for the same reasons when people say it to me and expect the sentiment returned to them. Especially when it’s a customer at my day job. But then I guess that’s where I hear it the most, seeing as I’m not very social outside of work. LOL. 
 I find that if I want to bless someone at work, there are a lot of ways to do it other than saying, “God bless you.  
 I say God bless you mostly at the end of something I wrote to one of my brethren but I don’t do it because I want someone to say God bless you also. I guess with me it is just a practice or habit. I never looked at it in the slant at which you view it before though. 
 What about Christians who say “God Bless You  to a nonbeliever? That annoys me. Is it improper for a Christian to do that? 
 “If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed: For he that biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds.  (2 John 1:10-11 King James Version) 
 Hello and thank you for this chapter and verse. My wife and I were discussing this and I am bad about saying God Bless. Not anymore unless I know for a fact they are a Christian. This helped me to find what I was looking for thank you it is appreciated… Steve 
 This verse of scripture is referring to the teachings of Christ as Redeemer, Lord, only way to God and salvation. His teachings of fallen man in relationship to a Holy God. Not reminding a person that all blessings come from God. 
 its just someone saying what they are used to, if you fell offended just tell them not to say it near them. 
 Yeh, I don’t say it back to them, but I say thank you. Most people that say it to me don’t know I don’t believe in what they believe in. So I take it as a complement without correcting them because, I don’t know how to tell them they don’t have to say “God Bless You  to me, without sounding rude. 
 Talk is cheap so it is easier to “say  bless you than to be a blessing to your life by giving or showing kindness. They are no better to their Christian brothers and sisters. 
 Some words are better left unsaid.. I feel that someone can be a blessing in your life..God does bless us and I don’t care if someone tells me God Bleas You, because He does everyday. 
 Yep. I say, “Dios te bendiga  to friends and neighbors in Mexico when I’m on my way out the door. I am not soliciting a response…I am offering a blessing…and a simple reminder that God is with us. 
 This is a sad post. May God bless you and may you experience life a little more, so you could have a less trivial pet peeve. 
 I totally agree. The author of this post is being too judgmental and please remember that we are told to judge not. Frankly, I would rather hear someone end a conversation with “God bless you  rather than “take care . It shows that they really care and are hoping for God’s best for me and just want me to know that. 
 You say people care for you when they say God bless you….. I totally disagree….as most people say it…… Without thinking too much…..just like when people say f**k off…… There not a lot of thinking behind it… 
 careful what you speak out of your mouth because you speak it into existence so why not say God bless you!! Do a study about what happens to your heart when you sneeze, it stops beating!! So if you are still living after you sneeze God just blessed you to live again. 
 Beautifully said Sharon. When someone say those words to me I smile and say thank you and same to you. I would rather hear God bless you rather those hateful words. 
 I felt God bless you quite hurting as it reminds me of all those people who go to such length to preach to me, cannot take no as an answer and hurt me saying that I am pathetic for not believing in God when I explained point on point why I am unable to believe in God. I do not want God to bless me if he is sending people out to hurt others whenever we cannot believe in him. 
 Amen to all you said!!! I could not have said it better!!! God bless you as you serve Him in your life and aeek His will!!! 
 “Re: The Great Blessing of Numbers chapter 6, I believe that there is a definite reason why these words (when read or said) provide such joy, comfort and peace. The listener is experiencing the very power of The Word of God. Note that the LORD does not command the priests to bless the people with their own words, but rather provides the exact formulation for the blessing. This reveals that the blessing is from the LORD Himself. The priests are but the means for transmitting His grace.   
 Excerpt From: Mike Stair. “The World’s Favorite Bible Verses.  MS Peabooks, 2013. iBooks. https://itun.es/us/8lbRJ.n 
 I agree that these words provide joy, comfort and peace to most if not all of us. However this could be “feel good  rather than the real McCoy. The priests were required to represent God in the OT/Numbers, and bless the people, give them instructions, facilitate forgiveness through animal sacrifice etc. But in the NT “it is finished  and people must be discipled to appropriate the grace and blessings through faith. Else, one might like to sneeze just to hear a God Bless you (!) one would consider it more “blessed  /prefer to hear it from a Priest or even a Bishop etc. 
 I think for a person to day  “God bless you  Is very thoughtful, I choose to bless others rather than say, God curse you, we live in a society where there is so much hate, why not just bless each other when ever we can, even strangers, it may put a smile on someone face that has lost hope in God and people.. feel free to say, God bless you to me at anytime.. God Bless You All, 
 I usually say God bless you when I wish someone a Happy Birthday! I never want them to say it back to me! I think you are being very judgemental about this subject! Why does it bother you so much? Are you a Christian? Maybe not? I guess you wouldn’t understand that maybe when we as Christians say it, we mean it from our hearts! Only God knows our hearts! Please don’t let it bother you so much! Try to examine your own heart and ask yourself the question “why do these words bother me so much? Wouldn’t I like God’s blessing on me? People don’t usually say God bless you to get you to say God bless you back to them. 
 LOL – I will stand clear i don’t want to get too close, I might knock off that chip on your shoulder…smiles. 
 Ha! Well, yes, I think the tone of this post is not as inquisitive as I meant it to be. I am trying to ask a question about why people say “God Bless you  (or don’t). Definitely wasn’t intending to sound holier-than-thou. 
 Yes, and I say it too sometimes. I just think some Christians say this so often, it make them sound like they are trying to appear righteous and pious before others. 
 “…. trying to appear righteous and pious before others  
 Bull’s eye!!! 
 Yes, Christianese lexicons are kinda irritating for me…. 
 Mmmm, but these become my major difficulty to read the Bible…. Because there are many Christianese lexicons in the Bible!!! For example: I can’t stop thinking Apostle Paul is a holier-than-thou disciple of God!!! What is “heart of flesh ? What did he mean with “present your bodies a living sacrifice ? Why did he not write his letters in plain sense? 
 Many of these terms would have made sense to the people in those days. But because we are separated by 2000 years, and culture, and language, we don’t understand some of it. It would be like if you tried reading Plato or Aristotle. Much you would understand; some you would not. 
 We can bridge the camp through some cultural and historical background studies. 
 I live in the United States where it’s politically incorrect to appear ‘righteous and pious.’ Any religious expression at all…it’s more likely that will mean you’ll get laughed, snickered at, or just an eye roll is more likely than being thought more highly of because of piety. In fact, if anything, I’d admire their courage for being proud of their faith despite the fact they’re more likely to lose social status points than gain them. 
 I live in the Unites States also and find the opposite to be true. People mock those who think that Christianity is all about saying certain words, carrying big Bibles, and wearing Christian t-shirts, while doing little to tangibly help people around us. They should know we are Christians by our love, not by the words that come out of our mouth. 
 Where do you live that I may move there? I think you read somewhere Seattle? Not that way in the midwest. Generally, I don’t bring politics or religion up, someone else has to broached the topic. Sure, people mock people for the reasons you mentioned, but it’s not limited to that at all. Sometimes all it takes is the mere mention of judeo-christian topics in the public arena. A few University classes, I’ve been given lower grades for my christian views. Also been laughed at for considering the Bible as reliable history(it was a University Canonicity class and they asked my opinion, so I answered). My christian friends and acquaintances, they’ve had similar experiences. We typically don’t carry any bible since we have apps now that take care of that. Don’t wear christian shirts. We do engage in ministry(churches I’ve been involved with if you aren’t involved in ministry, you are ostracized). Of course I’m not sure how someone is going to know one way or another whether someone is involved in ministry unless they were close friends or involved in that ministry. 
 You wrote: 
 They should know we are Christians by our love, not by the words that come out of our mouth. 
 I don’t know that I would agree that speaking the truth in love is a bad thing. I think Paul said something about that. I would tend to agree with him. I think both are important. 
 I think saying “God Bless You is okay, but don’t assume everyone is a believer. That’s like me saying “Merry Christmas  to everyone. Not everyone celebrates Christmas. But I think some people think that the majority of people believe in God. I take it as a complement that you care about me…so I don’t say anything, but saying “Have a Good day  still makes me feel good. 
 But, is it possible to have a genuine conversation with a person and not feel as though when they say, God Bless You that you are supposed to say it back? I can barely have a mothwr daughter conversation without my mother starting and ending with God Bless You. Sometimes a simple good morning, how are you is what I want to converse with her. Besides I am fully aware of how Blessed I am, as a child of God there is that deep understanding and belief that I exist and and receive my gifts due to being blessed. 
 I feel like I tested ‘Love as a universal language’ and ‘the body does not lie’ and bless you is okay. I also suspect as extreme as ‘your higher power just blessed you’ after a sneeze is what “God bless you  after a sneeze intended. Saying bless you has only recently started presenting itself in my life and it is (I think) encouraging and uplifting and can be enlightening and empowering but not entirely by itself. Therefore only those that do not believe in a higher power at all will take offense. I could be wrong I do believe in a higher power and in love as the universal language (for lack of a better phrase of words, although it might be more universal today to say sex is the universal language) and in this post just now realized I have to change my 100% enabler label to 99% based on the higher power belief. 
 GOD said that when others curse you that we should bless them. I saw Ted Cruz walking through an airport being cursed by some woman and he just looked at her and said “GOD bless  
 Only the Lord and ourselves know our true motives and intentions. This particular topic on your page really bothered me, especially coming from a follower of Christ. I love the Lord. I am a sinner. I make mistakes and I am in no way judging you as a child of God. I just wanted to share my honest feelings about the things that you said. For me, saying God bless you is nothing more than acknowledging the Lord and His limitless power to bless….OR curse. When I say God bless you, it is virtually a lifting of prayer to the Lord over that person for me personally. I make the plea, asking for the blessing, but God alone chooses whom He will bless. I don’t used coined “spiritual  phrases to everyone I meet, but it is special to me for someone….anyone…..even a stranger to sincerely ask God’s blessing on my life. Now, back to motives. Their motive may be not be pure, but I’m not God and cannot make that call, but to assume that everyone who wears a T shirt with scripture or the mention of Jesus, anyone that may be carrying a Bible, or using language from the Bible are somehow “hyper- I forgot the exact term you used, is very critical and even petty in my opinion. Christians have been hammered with political correctness. We have been indoctrinated to believe that we to be true Christians, we must embrace ALL things, all beliefs, so as not to “offend  anyone. PC has literally shut the mouths of Christians. There will always be sheep and their will always be those posing as sheep, but please don’t assume that I am a “hyper  or fanatical Jesus freak because I love the Lord and ask His blessings on them. I commonly say, “What a blessing,  or “what a beautiful gift from the Lord,  and many other references to the One who gave it all for me. All blessings are from God, and we should pray those blessings over ALL…..not just those like us. Jesus gave His all, His life to cover my sin and the sin of anyone who makes Him Lord of their lives. How in the world can a Christian never mention God’s great blessings in their lives in public?? It is all about our hearts individually, and not to be disrespectful, what you may believe about me is of no consequence. My value is in Christ alone and I will share that, too, if I feel led. Man, I’m feeling like a real Jesus freak, but hey, that’s OK because He knows my every thought and motive. One more thing. As Christians, we are called to always raise, lift up, edify one another, never even hedging on shaming anyone on how they choose to carry out their walk with the Lord. That is the Lord’s domain. Now, if you were rebuking a sinful act, that would be a different story. Even then, we are called to share the Lord’s word from a place of love…..never shame. This is what bothered me about this post. Some of our personal quirks, if not Biblical, should be left between the Lord and ourselves, so that we never become a snare to unbelievers. If the Lord truly is our first priority, the gates of hell will never shut our mouths about what the Lord had done for us. Thank you for listening. 
 In most contexts these religious sayings are probably meaningless and insincere. “God bless you  is sort of a religious substitute for hello, goodbye, and how are you? . 
 We regularly spend time with the homeless, and usually take water, food and other items with us. We try to spend time with them, listen to their stories, find out their needs and so on. Distributing things to them is not our primary purpose for visiting them, just as taking a bouquet or bottle of wine is not most people’s primary purpose when visiting a friend. 
 The homeless, even those who have never met us previously, regularly say “God bless you  when we leave. I understand that for some of them they’re doing what they think is expected of them when someone visits and brings something for them. However, there is often more to it than that. 
 Some say “God bless you for coming down and spending time with us. Thank you for remembering us and caring about us.  Almost every time we go, there are a few who explain that something we gave them was exactly what they needed, had been unable to get through the usual places they get things (such as the size of pants they need, shoes in their size, underwear or whatever), and sometimes had prayed for that very morning. 
 Last week we approached a man and woman who were sitting on the sidewalk. Their heads were down. I assumed they were dozing. I waited a few seconds and asked “Do you need water/  They raised their heads and said they did. Then I asked if they needed heavy long sleeve shirts for the cold nights. They stared at me, and after a strange silence asked what sizes I had. I had exactly their sizes. 
 After they had put on the warm shirts I had given them, the man spoke. “We’ve been out here since yesterday, but weren’t prepared for the cold night. We asked some of the other homeless this morning where we could get some warmer clothes, and they told us we’d have to wait until tomorrow because there’s no place to get them on Sunday. We’re believers, so we decided to pray and ask God to help us out. While we were praying you walked up with exactly what we needed, plus water, a sandwich and fruit. God is good. God bless you.  
 That’s a condensed version of our conversation. Conversations like those, however, have helped me not ignore the “God bless you  comments I often hear. 
 Sam, Right. I agree. I think in most contexts, it is little more than a religious greeting. I shouldn’t read too much into it. 
 I think that given the situation in which someone said “God bless you  is exactly the right time, place, and context. You blessed them tangibly, and they blessed you in return, which in that context, means, “Thank you. You were God’s blessing to me, and I hope He blesses you in return.  
 God bless you both because I am teary eyed from Sam’s homeless ministry and Jeremy’s search for an answer to God bless you response. I always felt it an express of good will to the giver and receiver. God bless you both for sharing your experience, knowledge and thoughts. 
 Well said, Cathy. I agree. It was a perfect exchange (between Sam & Jeremy). Both points of view were made and made very well. 
 Whenever I hear the phrase: “God Bless You.  I simply reply as earnestly as I can with: {smile} “Indeed, He has…as He has also done to you.  From there 3 types of reactions follow – a. Either an equally earnest or pleasantly surprised acknowledgement b. A puzzled and hesitant acknowledgement OR c. A flat out disappointment – as if I should have bestowed ‘something’ upon them 
 So everyone has their view and position on a traditional “habit  that has spanned thousands of years, languages and cultures. Just know your audience…and as a Christian do what is right WITHOUT compromising YOUR integrity and relationship with God. For THAT is all that matters… 
 When all else fails, simply…smile and say: “May God Bless Us BOTH.  
 Do you think there may be an appropriate time to hear or say “May God bless you!  As well as an inappropriate time? 
 I think when it has become just a phrase to help me sound spiritual or it is said without real thought then it has become meaningless lingo. 
 When the persons who received an answer to a prayer express their gratitude through an expressed blessing, I feel it appropriate to respond either in kind or with something like “God has blessed us both by our meeting today!  It shows that we are engaged in the conversation and the relationship…. or so it seems to me. 
 Well, I’m going to buck the trend here and say that I’m a deliberate sayer of “God bless you.  There’s a pretty good biblical precedent for it, for one thing, but for another, I don’t say it casually. When I say or type “God bless,  I’m truly praying to ask God’s blessing on an individual. Furthermore, when I help a homeless person (to use an example from another comment), I want to make sure they know that I’m not just excercising my own kindness; I’m actually passing on God’s blessing to them. 
 Now that said, I deliberately will not say “God bless you  when someone sneezes, as that does not make any sense to me whatsoever. 😉 
 I am in agreement with you here. I do say God bless you, and I say it in all sincerity. However I also don’t say God bless you when people sneeze. Paul would end his letters by speaking a blessing to his readers. “God bless you  may not be as specific as Paul’s “May the grace of the Lord Jesus be with you  was but in my heart I say it from deep within, with a deep desire for God’s grace to shower an individual. 
 Hello Jeremy. I think some people misunderstand you but I think I can relate with you. Actually I’ve been feeling uncomfortable saying God bless you especially to my fellow believers in church sensing that it becomes shallow and insincere just like a normal greeting or expression because of its repetitive nature. I mean we’re already blessed aren’t we? Actually I’ve been hesitant to share this to anyone because maybe there’s just something wrong with my heart but your words resonated with my thoughts and Im so thankful for your inquisitiveness and transparency. I mean, cant people hear me out without prejudice and think about my questions without judging me? I still have to learn a lot of things and I think that there’s plenty room for growth in each of us 
 Thanks, Pam. I think you should listen to your heart. I believe you sense that these sorts of “greetings  can often (but not always) just be shallow Christian greetings that try to show others how “spiritual  you are. So feel free to just talk normally to other people without the need to fill your language with Christian lingo. 
 in our ministry, we have tried to get away from using “God Bless you  because of the cliche nature but also because of the need to communicate on the same level as the people we serve. Saying “God bless you  can make us seem superior, like we can somehow convey God’s blessing, or like we are in good with God and they are not. Lately, we have been saying “God Loves You  instead, because we want them to know that. it is really cool to watch someones face when you give them something ans simply say “God loves you . 
 Interesting. I am glad that you made a decision about what to say and why. Maybe I am a bit jaded by the use of the phrase in my own ministry setting where some people who use it simply seem to be trying to broadcast to everyone else, “Hey look at me! I am such a pious Christian!  
 I am sure I am too critical on this. I think I would love it if I sensed it was a genuine prayer for blessing. I get the feeling from some, however, that it is just a Christianized “hello.  And when said loudly and repeatedly in a public setting, it reminds me of what Jesus said about people praying in the marketplace and street corners to be seen and heard by men. 
 GOOD ANSWER! GOD BLESS YOU and I am not going to stop asking God to bless people. Ax a matter of fact, I leave you with the following prayer: May God bless you. ALL OF YOU! And I mean and pray this in the name of my LORD and Savior, Jesus Christ. 
 My reply (above March 1, 2016 at 2;02 pm) was for Chuck McKnight from January 24, 2014 at 5:46 pm 
 Good-bye all, and again, God bless you…anyone who will receive my sincere blessings to ask God to bless them. 
 I find that being kind to people they ocassionally say I’m kind. I use that opportunity to tell them I’m not showing them my kindness, I’m showing them GODs kindness. It can open up doors to talk to people about GOD 
 A couple of times you say “I know they want me to say it back.  So, what I’m reading is your assuming they want you to say it back. How do we know what they are looking for when they say it? Maybe it’s just a salutation or maybe they want God to bless us. 
 To much “Christian speak,  sticks in my craw too. But, I try to let it go because I know people are in different points of their relationship with God. 
 For the most part, I do the same thing. I just let it go most of the time. I have never told anyone to their face to stop saying it…. just in a blog post that goes out to thousands of people. Ha! This post might not have been the best idea…. 
 Only when we’re getting ready to insult somebody and we’ve already worn out “bless their heart . That’s how we roll in the south. 🙂 
 I’m completely with you on “Christian lingo fillers.  I seldom end a conversation or email with “God bless you,  but when I do, it is really a form of a prayer asking (implicitly) that God WOULD bless that person in whatever way they need to be blessed. Often it is sensing his presence in whatever difficult circumstance they just described. Does this make sense? 
 That is a great practice! I should have had my wife read over this post before I published it. My tone is much more negative than I intended. If someone says “God bless you  as a genuine form of prayerful blessing, I am all for it. Glad you have this practice. 
 If we meet (not likely with me in Holland and you over there) I will say: ‘Greetings Earthling’ 
 But to be honest, I do not say ‘God bless you’ to often. But I do not get anoyed by people who do. I mean, when I read blog comments or the like, people kinda talk funny as well (LOL, BFF, OMG). Every group has its own slang. Come to think about it, when people over-Christionise me in conversations I do tend to laugh a bit… Hopefully they do not hold me accountable. Can somebody echo that? 
 Anyway, maybe the Dutch are a bit more down to earth? 
 You are right that every group has its own slang. “God bless you  is part of the Christian slang for many people. It looks, however, that some people say it with the prayerful intention of asking God’s blessing on the people they meet. 
 And who knows? Maybe the Dutch are more down to earth. We American’s tend to be overzealous in most of what we do… 
 You are right, God has already blessed us. We have been given every spiritual blessing in Christ Jesus. Ephesians 1:3 “Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ,  
 I do not agree with you. There is nothing wrong to say “God Bless You  We read too much into people’s minds. I do beleive they mean well. I will always end up my email by saying “God Bless  I do agree if some one over use the “God Bless You  to often, may 3 to 5 times. Do not make a mountain out of a molehill. 
 In the Bible it says if any two agree in “My Name  “I will answer . It’s only when we say “good luck  etc. etc. or offer a blessing to one outside the faith that it goes into a cold shadow of its power and glory. 
 Dear Adrian, I get where your coming from but I disagree that If a Christian gives a blessing to a non believer it has nill effect when I worked for a short time on a check out in a supermarket I bade them farewell with a blessing, the choice was theirs to receive the gift and open it. I used to pray for each of my customers as I was talking to them. There were a few I let by as I felt I was to leave them for the present. I never had ant negative feed back. Jesus blessed non believers all the time as He healed and taught the people, the opportumity to believe and change was and still is available. Love Clive X 
 I do not think saying “God bless you  holds any meaning. We are to be the hands of God and we are to use them to bless others. Saying “God bless  is a cop out and makes us sound spiritual. Give those words some flesh, some substance, some color, some taste, some feeling. some compassion. Let someone know the blessing of God through you. Make Him and his blessings visible and real. 
 I hear what you’re saying in terms of “God bless you  as trite, “Christian-ese  rhetoric; but when I say it, I mean it. I am genuinely praying that God would bless the person with what they are in need of. As I leave them, I often continue in prayer for them based on what I’ve seen, sensed or heard. I’m not trying to be “religious;  that’s just how I flow! 
 Yes, I am primarily referring to Christianese in this post. If someone means it and says it prayerfully, then I don’t mind. However, I do want people to be wary of sounding overly pious and holy toward others. It can sometimes come across in the wrong way. 
 Glad to hear “Big Faith ; Clive, hate to put myself on the spot but was basing my response on scripture where it says something to the point of not blessing a person on a journey or path or on their way etc. leaning towards I believe that unbelievers are on a path outside of Christ. So something to the effect whereas as you don’t say to stranger “good luck  or something similar is how I’ve always took it.? 
 BTW someone I have been praying for outside of Christ has been softening their heart towards The Lord; understanding grace and love helps immeasurably! 
 I think I have actually offended people when I don’t respond to a sneeze with “Bless you.  I just can’t get myself to do it. Maybe it’s a pride issue? I don’t know. And for the rest…. I do not like Christianese, so the words are rarely used, unless I feel a real prompting from God. Thanks for the fun conversation. Hearing all of the various responses has been quite interesting. 
 It has been an interesting topic, with many points of view on the subject. Thanks for weighing in. I probably only say “God bless you  to my wife, because she says it to me. I don’t think I have ever said it to anyone else. 
 Wow, there are some interesting post regarding this “phraseology , however, I am of the mindset that if it’s religious jargon or well intentioned, I will take a God Bless you any day any time. ? Duet: 11:26 tells us “I call heaven and earth to witness against you today, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and curse . I know what God Bless you means to me. We are a family that speaks God’s blessing over our children daily, so again, I will take a God Bless you anytime, real or fake. Apostle Paul said, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is proclaimed: so it’s difficult to understand how someone could take offense to someone saying God Bless You. Would you be offended or think it religious, or “Christianese , if someone said Bless you with in this manner: may our Father, The Great I AM, El Shaddai, Yahweh, Elohim, Adonai, Alpha and Omega, Jehovah Shalom, Raha, Tsidkenu, Jireh, Nissi, Mekoddishkem, Sabaoth, Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Yeshua, Healer, Redeemer, and the precious Holy Spirit Bless you with every good and perfect gift. Would this be offensive? I don’t think so. That’s what I hear when someone says “God Bless You . So I’ll say it, God Bless you my brothers and Sisters. 
 Right. I don’t think it is offensive, it just comes across to some as unreal, or overly pious, or “holier-than-thou.  But again, I would rather take a “God bless you  than a “F* you  any day. In a day when people hurl curses around all the time, maybe it is good to pass around blessings as well. 
 I usually say “Bless you  when someone sneezes, because it is more meaningful than “Gesundheit  in most English conversations. That the blessings would come from God is implied, but no matter what faith, if any, the sneezer has, just saying it brings God, Allah, Jehovah the Tao, G-d, that which cannot be named, more into the awareness of both of us; which can never be a bad thing. “Gesundheit  means “good health.  “Bless you  seems more holistic to me – a wish for good spiritual health, as well as physical. I sometimes say “Bless you  to someone as a sincere expression of exceptional gratefulness. Perhaps my gratefulness should always be at the level of ‘exceptional’, and I’m working on it, but I’m “only’ human, after all! 
 I should add that it is an unobtrusive way of bringing God into the awareness of the moment. Unobtrusive is important. Outright preaching is offensive to many people. Also. hardly anyone is truly qualified to preach to anyone else. I haven’t yet encountered such a person. These words from a certain popular song, as uninspired as the rest of the lyrics may be, are worth bearing in mind: I can not save you; I can’t even save myself 
 As (the original) Tiny Tim put it, “God bless us, every one.  
 Absolutely. That is my only real point. I want to be unobtrusive, and be a real blessing to someone. If I am always spouting Christianese, this is annoying to some, and if I say, “Too bad, I am going to annoy them in Jesus name  I am not sure this is what Jesus wants us to do. There are so many ways to bless people other than saying “God bless you  I think we need the wisdom of the Holy Spirit to know how best to bless others. 
 I have found that it is mostly younger Christians that do this sort of thing, I did when I first became a Christian in the 70’s and I wore a big wooden cross on the side of my pants and carried my bible everywhere I went. My dad used to say if it doesn’t hurt anyone and is not hugely distorting scripture but makes them feel closer to God, don’t knock it as it is better than them being in the world and maybe using foul language and going to hell. 
 I liked what Christopher Bowen said, that He has already blessed us. “May you love Him more, Learn more of His love for you and grow in your faith in Him that you may recognize and enjoy more of His blessings   maybe is what I would like to hear said to me, and say too to another (though the other may not !); In fact a beautiful blessing in Numbers 6 while very relevant for then in the OT, is not so now in NT times (methinks). He HAS made His face to shine upon us, He HAS given us His peace etc. (since the time He redeemed us on the Cross), so saying May the Lord bless you etc. is like saying :you are not yet redeemed  or reflects a lack of acknowledgment / realization of the “Finished  work on the Cross. (OT ends where NT begins, at the Cross, not at Matt 1:1 and not even at Christmas/Birth of our dear Lord Jesus Christ.) 
 Of course we should bless people. But blessing people does not just consist of saying “God bless you.  Let us actually bless them! Love, serve, help, heal, give. Tangible blessings. 
 How about a comment upon departure, for instance, “we are blessed , or, “God bless us/you with wisdom  
 I don’t actually mind “God bless you  when it is accompanied with love and service. But words are just words. 
 That implies that the person saying GOD bless has ulterior motives. How can anyone read someone else’s mind as to their intent? 
 I have no problem saying God bless you or someone saying it to myself. When I pray I ask for God blessings and also ask God in prayer to bless others. God want us to let others know that he is God the father that blesses others. All blessing come from the father. Many people feel that he blessing of God is a gift. I feel many don’t like to say God bless you because the don’t want others to know that they are spiritual. I’m very open sharing with others that I love God. The bible mention our father saying they hated me first.so if you are a lover of God you are heated. then I feel hate me. I welcome God blessing and I love hearing it. many of my friends who know God do not reject to hearing it or saying it. You here more people using God name in vain and some people is ok with that. I do understand when God says to be not of this world. Well you have a good day. 
 Yes, each person must do what God is leading them to do. It sounds like you are able to help and encourage people by saying this. Remember to actually love and serve them as well (so you can BE a blessing) when you get the opportunity! 
 if they say “God bless you  to me, I say thank you… i’ll take all the blessings that come my way and be grateful. It has nothing to do with religion… 
 Well I am very sorry to hear this and actually see That Christians have gotten so political about this its horrible!!! You know tonight My wife and I and a friend went to an event at a local Church we use to attend O and by the way I always tell my wife “God Bless You . Its the way I am she always tells me back!!! We saw one of the head pastors there @ Horizon Christian Fellowship he barley said hello no one there came up to us and said hello or anything!!! They where all in there own clicks!!! I have been hurt twice from this and I will never get hurt again my wife and I VOW to never step foot in a church again!!! We haven’t been to church for a while we thought we would try this event but never again to another church again!!!! We say God Bless you to store clerks everyone you know what everyone needs a blessing from The Good Lord!!! Not to brag or anything but I am 35 my wife is 46 and we are retired never have to work again because of the generosity of her father who passed left us a substantial amount!!! and her grandmother who recently passed left us twenty grand and since we do not need it I tell ya we wont be giving it to any churches because of the way they have treated us it will be going to the disabled vets!!!! So you know what bank on that and maybe a little Of God’s Blessings does not hurt anyone it did us wonders!!! The Church of the Lord Jesus is in the hearts of men not some building well My wife and I can have church together in our home!!! we will be in our own click!!!! Church has gotten way too political away from the Bible where its meant to be!!!!! 
 Christopher, Be careful to not turn your experience in a congregation into a form of bitterness. I have fallen prey to this myself in the past, and such an attitude is only harmful. 
 There could be so much worse that cam be said other than ,God bless you . People don’t want us to say Merry Christmas, God Bless..etc. I think people have forgotten that Christians are human!! We sin, we are not perfect, we don’t always have the words that you want us to say. Calm down. There’s worse going on in the world than if someone says , “God bless you.  But if this is the worse thing that’s going on in your life, hey..you’re living pretty good. Believe me, working with the public, if someone says God bless, just take it and run. Unless you’d rather be cursed out and called everything BUT a child of God 
 I had to reflect upon this matter … I tell the Father after Mass, ‘God Bless You’. I tell those who ask for prayer or those who need prayer and are to proud to ask, ‘God Bless You’ . If someone does something overly nice for me or someone else and I see it, I will say, ‘God Bless You.’ If I am in a place of business and am in an overly jubilant mood, I will likely blurt out to everyone, ‘Hope all of y’all have a blessed day.’ In any other one on one situation, I will say, ‘You have a blessed day or a blessed rest of today or a best rest of the week.’ It depends on the individual circumstances. 
 If you are looking for a response, you are more than welcome to use mine… I simply reply, “Heaven help you as well,  to them! It does, sometimes, get folks to thinking and has even resulted in a couple of interesting conversations. 
 Forget about sneezes, though. On this day in 600 AD, Pope Gregory the great declared that “God bless you  was the appropriate response to a sneeze and, with 1415 years of momentum behind it, I do not see that changing! 
 Your making this way to big of deal. When I say God bless you or anything of the sort I am not looking for any kind of reciprocation I am simply wishing Gods blessing on you because I believe everything, life itself for example to be a blessing. I believe it to be a gift and I want you to experience the same joy that I do. To do so otherwise would be from my perspective selfish. And if your wondering how it goes in my “God bless you home  my dad always said before bed “God bless you and have sweet dreams  even to my not so spiritual siblings. As I hope to one day do for my children. The only ill intent when someone says good bless you is hoping you receive a better blessing then the ine saying it. 
 I doubt you would get peeved if someone says “have a nice day …even if you are already having a nice day and they said it so mechanically and moved on. If there is no end to how much God can bless a man, then what is so uncomfortable about someone wishing you more of the goodness that only God can give? Maybe I see it this way cuz I come from a part of the world where miracles are hard to find but everyone needs one. so when someone says   God bless you , believe me, you say a loud “Amen . U dont think about how mechanical it sounds or why all christians have to be so cliche. Instead u think about how good God has been and pray that he causes his face to smile upon and hope the devil doesn’t have one up his sleeves for you that day. Just saying 
 I do, actually. Maybe I’m just a depressed person. Ha! The thing is that I want people to say what they mean and think about what they say. I never ask someone “How are you?  unless I really mean it. If I just want to greet them, I simply say, “Hello.  
 As for “God bless you,  I understand why people say it. I just think it is a religious way of saying “Hello  so that some people can sound more righteous in front of others. 
 Saying God Bless you dates back way further than you think. Its been around a long time, written in Numbers 6:24. It is a beautiful sentiment to express to another person. When used genuinely and not robotically it is saying, “I care about you. I hope God blesses you abundantly in your coming and going. I hope he blesses you in sickness and health.  Anytime any believer wants to bless me, I’ll take it. There is so much ugliness in the world. So much irritation. So much ill will. When somebody says, “God bless you,  I think it is beautiful. I am sad for you that you feel otherwise. With that said, I hope God blesses you despite your indifference. He loves you. He cares deeply for you. He wants the best for your life. He longs for you to spend time with him. To know about him in a new way. Turn away from religion and towards a personal relationship with Him. May the “Lord bless you and keep you; may the Lord make his face shine on you and be gracious to you; may the Lord turn is face toward you and give you peace.  May you find selah and rest easy. 
 I cannot & will not say “God bless you  because I cannot order God to perform blessings at my will. Surely if I would like someone to be blessed, I will ask by prayer. 
 I don’t always say it, but sometimes when the customary pleasantries are being exchanged (ex grocery store), I offer up “have a blessed day . “God bless you  implies a long term transformation in my view. Instead of having a “great day , a blessed day is one step better IMHO. Hopefully it has the added benefit of getting them to focus (if only momentarily) on what’s important. 
 I remember a lady who worked the lunch counter, and when you would ask her how she was, she would always respond “I’m blessed . Back when my faith was formative, it would catch me by surprise and remind me….. 
 It is very hard for us good single people to have someone say to us God Bless You when many of us are still Not married with no family, and many single women are much Good at handling it a lot better than us single men which i certainly will admit. Peace. 
 If today’s form of greetings are not used because they are not found in the Bible, then why do we not practice using the greetings that are in the Bible? Three of many examples: 
 Ruth 2:9, Just then Boaz arrived from Bethlehem and greeted the harvesters, “The LORD be with you!  “The LORD bless you!  they answered. 
 Mat 28:9: And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, “All hail  (an interjection found only in the Gospels as the translation of chaire, chairete, meaning “Rejoice! . 
 Paul’s admonishion to greet each other with a holy kiss (not on the lips, according to Hebrew custom). 
 Paul always heaped blessings on those he wrote to; not out of cultural pleasantries, but from his love for the saints. 
 You ever thought that it’s actually coming from someone’s heart to say God bless you, not so you can say it back. It says in the bible to do things from the heart without expectations. When I say that is how I feel and a blessing does always mean that ur going to get extra, it can at times simply mean for you to be in Gods mercy. For example if you are leaving and I say bye God bless you, I mean for God to be with you, that’s a blessing to me. And I know that yes he’s is with you either way but if something evil is trying to hurt u come near you with saying God bless you I know that it cuts that and it is harder for it to touch you. I think you should receive it gracefully Vs looking at it in that manner. When u receive it, eventually it will come from your heart to actually say it to someone when you feel in your heart to do it. You should rebuik what ever is making you feel that way towards receding something that means no harm but only good to you. You are cutting your blessings because knows your heart and you sound angry and God looks at that. So I say to you if you have received Jesus as your Lord and savior , that you should start receiving Gods blessing even when it is just being said by one of our brothers and sisters. You are never well enough not to receive a blessing from God. I hope that you can rebuik all evil that makes you upset about someone saying that to you and I ask God to bless you out of that fight of receiving a simple wish of people asking God to continue to bless u! In Jesus name … Amen! 
 I just hang out with a lot of non-Christians, and they roll their eyes at how some Christians talk. They think it is an attempt to appear “holier than thou.  It is like in the days of Jesus when certain religious people would pray out loud on the street corners and in the marketplace and have their prayer tassles longer than others just so they could be seen to be righteous. 
 If Christians want to use Christian lingo around each other fine…. but when we are talking with non-Christians, I think that such Christian lingo only hinders our ability to live as salt and light among them. If we want to be a blessing to non-Christians, it should be done with actions rather than words. 
 I agree, we should bless them with actions instead of words. I just have to say that at times all we can do is bless them with words because it could just be in passing. We never know what someone is going through and those words may help them. So, I think bless them in as many way possible. When you do it from the heart God knows and if you can only do it with words it is okay because God is a mighty God and some of us are at different levels with him and some words may result in actions just because of who is saying them. God listens and knows what the non believers need. If you ask me, they need God. Now, I’m not saying that saying God bless you would be the only way of opening that door, but in a lot of cases it can be. Saying God bless you to a non believer To me is like sharing something they don’t have. And they may not receive it but it feels like I pulled one layer and it may take a million more of God bless you to get rid off all layers , but we are all made by God. With that said, I want to pull God out in you because I know he is in there somewhere, even when they dnt know it. I say God bless you so I can plant a seed. Because even when a person gets upset about that just means that the devil is scared because he knows God has all power! 
 It can also be a reminder that God has blessed us all, including the non believer because he sent his only Son to die for us. And all though some may know that some forget it very easily. And some still dnt realize it! 
 The non-believer must believe, come to a state of understanding, because no one enters the heavenly realm until they do believe in God. There is the gulf the vast area where those who do not believe will reside. Those of us who do believe in the Father the Son and the Holy Spirit will reside in Paradise with Him. Nothing that is evil, bad, or of darkness can be in the presence of God. There is hope for the non-believer, they must believe. John 3:16 – For God so loved the world that who so ever believeth in Him shall not perish but have everlasting life. We live by the word as He has instructed. 
 John 3:16 – For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. 
 Jeremy, there is no non-Christian or Christian lingo! We are not religious people either. We are simply Christ like people led by the Holy Spirit to speak words of life so that others can choose to open there hearts to salvation rather than reject it and stay on a path of destruction. Words are powerful! Saying the right words can be the difference in getting a job, saving or destroying a relationship, receiving salvation or rejecting it, etc. To whomever thinks words mean nothing, you are surely mistaken! Christians draw from the same vocabulary as everyone else. God Bless You. 
 Many times I have said “GOD bless you  to cashiers in stores, and most got a smile on their faces , and said thank you . You could tell that it was like a cup of cold refreshing water to them, especially when they are overwhelmed with customers. My pet peeve is when I see GOD Bless America. On signs, bumper stickers,etc., why it’s turned into a patriotic saying. Shouldn’t we be saying America bless GOD? Then (I feel) GOD will hear our confession of sin and heal our land. 
 Surely, “God Bless You  is not to be taken lightly. As a Christian, when I say it I mean it! I have read a lot of the comments here and I see some of you pass judgement on people who say it. First of all, you don’t know these people to pass judgement as to whether they mean it or not. As Christians, we have a duty to witness to others and to bless those who are less fortunate financially, spiritually, and physically. God knows my heart and my works when I say “God Bless You . God gave us all free will. So the next time someone blesses you with those words, you can either accept it as a blessing or move on. Out of love and being Christ like, I don’t want to see anyone lost for not receiving God’s blessings and his salvation. Even if you feel you have already been blessed, God’s blessings are everlasting and never end. God Bless You and love you all! 
 I think you’re making too much of it. When I say “God bless you  I don’t think that I’m using my Christian super powers to rain God’s blessings on you. What I’m saying really is, “may God bless you.  It’s just a nice thing to say, like “good morning . Or should we not say that either? After all, my saying “good morning  doesn’t make the morning good. If someone is already having a good morning then it’s redundant and if they’re having a bad morning then it’s cruel to say “good morning . Maybe we should just say, “hello, it’s morning . At least that’s factual and doesn’t imply anything that might annoy someone. 
 I might be making too much of it. But what would you think if a Muslim friend of yours kept telling you, “May Allah Bless You! ? 
 So between the Stop Saying God Bless You article and the Stop Using These Christian Cliches article, I gather that my “Christianese  makes people uncomfortable and I guess people should never feel uncomfortable so I should stop talking like a Christian, or at least keep my Jesus freak talk confined to the walls of the church where it belongs. Sorry, I’m in a street ministry. Political correctness just isn’t my bag. 
 I do not say God bless you for your kindness to people to ones that appear muslims, but I know their Allah is the same as our God to them. I am disabled and get around with a walker which it sometimes is hard to open a store door with. 
 “Blessed be the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has bless us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly realms, in Christ Jesus (Ephesians 1:3). 
 I found this post because I looked up “God Bless you as a greeting . I myself have judged the sincerity of it. 
 I think the author is on to something. If you are saying God Bless you simply as greeting, then you are not sincerely wishing a blessing on someone. 
 God Bless you is, or should be, an invocation. By your words you will be justified & by your words you will be condemned. The mouth speaks what the heart is full of. 
 Some amount of people using this, & related phrases (such as “have a blessed day ) are guilty of social phoniness. 
 Originally I was researching church-culture (which does exist) & a number of the comments here prompted me to respond. 
 Also, some of the comments here are showing a way too literal interpretation of “not judging . 
 We can evaluate motives, and there are places we are told to do so. Learn of discernment. 
 Lola, I sensed a veiled insult in your comment: You basically told the author to “get a life . That’s something worldly & carnal people do. In other words, his viewpoint, desire, or feelings are based on his lack of social interactions. 
 “Hey Jeremy, go out & hit a bar once in awhile!  Sorry I’m being sarcastic. 
 This article engendered a lot of distaste. I didn’t realize how touchy of an issue this is. 
 Jeremy I applaud you. When you take a stand, stand with it. 
 With that, Peace & Blessings to you, in all sincerity. 
 “God bless you  is a wishing clause, short form of “may God bless you  Because of God’s grace and blessing, we could continue life as a believer on earth, Instead of saying “God curse you,  wish people “may God bless you It’s not a greeting words but words of bid farewell to any one we love. It’s not a give out and receive back motive words. It’s just wishing to someone we love. It’s a part of farewell prayer. 
 The fact of life is God protects and blesses to all whom He loves and even chastise for He loves. So to express the fact about the believer life is not a wrong but “God bless you is words of faith. 
 Nothing much bothers me. Whatever’s clever suits me, if it suits you. Bless your heart, I believe is a southern way to flip you off. Or is it God bless your heart? I see it as a person’s hug, handshake, or kiss, when greeting. I prefer a handshake I accept others from people I approve of. Not every friend is in the close friends family zone. 
 I read here something about the Dutch being more down to earth. Mostly that is true. Maar ook niet altijd hoor, ze kunnen ook erg zweverig zijn (if the Dutch guy still reads here) 
 It does irritate me also a bit, this ‘God bless you’ because it is often used in a way that it means nothing. 
 People do the most horrible things but “God bless’ . (and ‘God bless America’ First a politician talks war-language, and ends with this thoughtless pronuncation, very strange ) 
 But God blesses. And there are worse things one can say to another! 
 I am not a “God bless you  person but if I’m in a conversation with anyone who is, I am polite enough to let them be. I even reply God bless you, too sometimes. 
 But when I do see “What a blessing! …An answer to prayer! …God is so good. …That just blesses my heart. …Oh, bless your soul! …Praise Jesus! …Amen!  on social media, without any explanation, I admit it’s a little annoying… you know, maybe they’re not trying to be really mysterious but are genuinely thankful for something. I just let them be as well. 
 No I totally agree and get you. It irks me so I have never understood why and I’ve even asked people why do us Christians say that? Am I spos to say it back? Do you want me to say it back? I don’t want to say it back I feel as we are already blessed and been blessed a thousand times over 70×7 I mean when Jesus shed his blood isn’t that enough ? I know blessings continue to be countless in my life daily so I don’t feel the need to bless you or anyone else. The only thing I’ve ever heard about this that was kinda cool is that if a brother or sister tells you this its more powerful because we have the power in him of course to actually “bless people  but whatever I am so pet peevish I despise someone always ending everything with GOD BLESS I don’t even get an EFFN YOU.End Rant 
 I recently gave a older man and his wife this blessing. I was worried their truck was ready to break down and they would not arrive to their destination. That, while he smiled and drove away. 
 Remember out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. If you live your life for God’s glory, and bless those around you–family, friends, and strangers, it might be a natural flow. I desire for all men to come to saving faith in Christ JESUS. It’s not being “super spiritual  for me–it’s being a believer. JESUS CHRIST saved me from a miry pit almost 32 years ago. It’s a reminder that God is blessing us–whether people know HIM or not. 
 I think God bless you is a very positive words and I will be saying it to people as God is with me in my very situation its all because people say me God bless you. I want my God to be with them too in every situation that’s how love grows and that’s what God wants too love one another so next time someone says God bless you take it in positive way it really works. 
 I find it offensive. I guess in my personal experience people who were religious enough to say “bless you  (outside of the sneeze ordeal which I even say bless you out of childish habit) did it as some kind of display of their awesome religiousness vs other people’s sinner ways. Often it was a lead in to remind us of how we nonbelievers were going to go to Hell unless we got Jesus in our lives. I follow the path of the Traditional Witch when I’m feeling I need some religion at all. I am also licensed minister. I could pull out a pentacle and bless a Christian but I guarantee they would get offended. So this knife cuts both ways. 
 I say God Bless you all the time. I never say it with the expectation of someone saying it back to me. It is a prayer, a charge, a wish upon their lives that I want to give to them unconditionally. Freely we have received and freely we give. That’s it. Nothing more. 
 I totally agree with Leslie .It’s nut’s to think it’s not needed or innapropriate. As she said, who say’s your saying it to get a blessing back , maybe the persons sincere in wanting God to bless you . 
 You Don’t have to say it but who are you to tell others what they can’t say? God bless you!!! 
 I am not worthy to say to some one, specially to non Christian “God Bless You  
 But God blesses me and my family as we believed and work for His glory. 
 We can say, ‘praying for you…’ God is not going to move to a person as I or you or we wish. blessing and cursing is in His mighty hand only. 
 Let’s try to understand by our own, no copy & paste system, for His glory. 
 Fair enough criticisms. I actually enjoy the commonly repeated denouement of elderly black women, “…have a blessed day.  The shortened statement of fact, “God bless  is also used with such mild charm. My own knee-jerk universal is the refrain, to “take care.  
 More interestingly, perhaps, is the way that my own understanding of God may relate to this particular qualm. As OP has stated, “Yes he has, as he has blessed you too.  Indeed. God being Everything from which each of us was derived. Each a part of Him, like Him. 
 Maybe the echo does rob the words of its meaning. But I also think of voice of God resides in an echo. The “white noise  of the world. When we listen it relaxes and even gives us guidance. When we are open to listening to Everything. 
 In this way God’s blessing is the revelation, and even having the feeling with you. While feeling the blessing of God, in that revelation, we still might worry to lose it. 
 So I think with or without the hollowed meaning of the greeting, “God bless you,  it’s difficult enough to find yourself, Atman, finally at the face of Brahman. And I think everyone that has at last found some piece of God in their souls would agree that they hardly know how they arrived in the center of life’s labyrinth. But it feels like being blessed. 
 So let them have it. Realize that Everything is as it can be and laugh with us at the sky. Or the ground. Your choice. 
 When some Christians say “God bless you  their tone reveals that they really mean “F*** you.  You’ve seen some of that too, it sounds like. 
 I often end an email or message with ‘Every blessing’ or ‘Love and every blessing’. What I am saying is that I’m hoping the person I’m addressing will receive every blessing he or she is willing to receive. 
 Only one person has spoken up to me about this and it was a family member. He identifies as a Christian and is concerned that only God can bless. Not me. 
 Why would someone saying “God bless you,  no matter how many times they say it, make you uncomfortble? Can you ever truly have too many “blessings  from God? I know I can’t. But maybe that’s just me…. 
 If you mean it, say it. If you don’t mean it, don’t say it. If you are offering the blessing or responding to the blessing the same rule applies for either occasion. Not real complicated. 
 Re: stop saying God bless you. Hello, you are right. I had a dream last night where I was going to write to someone bless you. Then God spoke to me in my spirit in the dream and says it means nothing, speak a word over there life inspire them. 
 So you don’t appreciate it when people say God bless you whenever they leave or meet with you? Saying it after a sneeze is just because back when, when someone sneezed it was believed that was a point of vulnerability to demons and bad spirits. So they said “Bless you  to give you God’s blessing to keep you safe from those threats. 
 But you said, “When someone says, “God bless you,  what I want to say is: “He has. And He’s blessed you too. So let’s stop talking like religious nuts and have a conversation like normal people.  . Along with that you have also said, “Also, can we really call down the blessing of God upon our lives by appending every conversation with the words “God bless you ? . The blessing of God is always upon our lives, whether we say it is or not. It is not wrong to say “God bless you  or “Amen!  or “Praise be upon him  before, during, or after a conversation. 
 Not to point out the twig in your eye, with a log in mine, but if you are a Christian, then why do you ridicule others that follow their belief and spread the love of God in their day-to-day lives? And if you aren’t a Christian, than that pet peeve is your opinion. My opinion is people who don’t think about others’ beliefs before they ridicule, complain, or gossip about that other person(s), are what makes up majority of my pet peeve list. 
 Lose the “pet peeve  list it is a waste of time to keep one. Use that time for something positive. If God calls you home you do not want the last thing you did on earth was to add to a pet peeve list. That is something you feed to keep it. I saw an article of two little girls walking on the side of a charred mountain in Pakistan. They were alone and one child did not have on shoes. I am grateful everyday the Lord blesses me with. Everyday is not as good as another but I say what I have to say, forgive and let go. You are a Dr. be positive in all you have accomplished and there will be no time for pet peeves. Love ya! 
 Amen to all you said!!! I could not have said it better!!! God bless you as you serve Him in your life and aeek His will!!! 
 I say God bless all the time. My son said stop saying it. But it’s part of who I am in Christ. When I say it I really mean it. It’s come from the heart. And as I am walking away I say a prayer for them. 
 Christ will love you all the more for it own it, accept it John 3:16 – For God so loved the world He gave His only begotten Son that who so ever believeth in Him should not perish but have everlasting life. From the heart, God does bless you. 
 It feels disingenuous in a way that…we don’t need people telling us that to be blessed, now do we? I pray for people I’m concerned about without having to wave that in their faces. 
 So I replied to an uncle who has just recently become super religious this way: 
 “Merry Christmas. God bless you,  he said. 
 I reply: “Merry Christmas to you too! May the Force be with you.  
 I mean, he shouldn’t scoff at me giving him blessings in that way either, right? 
 I will share the same information with you, we are all on different levels of spiritualty. God is the only one to pass judgment. Because of my belief and the fact that you asked I do not agree with your response to your uncle, it was disrespectful. Who is to say what is right for him to be “super religious ? I think for a person to be how ever many steps closer to God no matter in what way is good. Would you take that from him? If he died after you said may the force be with you would that have made your day? Be kind in thought and in heart. My mother says if you can’t say anything nice do not say anything at all. 
 I say it because I truly want God to bless the person I say it to. If we could get our ego out of the way, and look to the one who blesses, whenever someone says it to us, we would be jumping for joy. Even if they don’t mean it, they still said it, and that blessing from GOD becomes yours. I need all the help I can get, so bring on the blessings! God bless you! 😆 
 My understanding of why we say God bless (you) originates from the time when the bubonic plague was killing thousands of people across Europe, sneezing was the first sign of infection so by wishing God’s blessings on someone could well be the last time you saw them and you wanted to wish them well. In these days of modern, more advanced and virilant diseases of plague like proportions maybe we should consider using the term more often. 
 Each to their own but I’ve never considered someone saying God bless to me as any type of evocation or command to God, instead simply that they trully wish me well and are expressing their feelings in a way that is pertinent to them. I always welcome good wishes, they’re far more welcome than bad ones. 
 If you object to someone wishing you well, in whatever way, then maybe you should consider asking them not to, or maybe if you feel a reply is necessary but don’t want to offend them simply say thank you. 
 I’ll conclude, as I often do when writing to those I don’t know, by wishing you peace. 
 I concur!!! I drove a school bus and when the children would sneeze I would say God bless you and your LITTLE germs. Getting sick from a child’s cold will knock a grown 7 ft. 350 lb. person on their back out for 4 weeks. I jest but not far off. Coronavirus should have awakened a lot of people to looking to God for as much assistance as possible and no matter how you ask we will all benefit from a blessing from God, in the name of Christ Jesus I pray we will all come to repentance. SYOTOS ~ 
 I am so over trying to please people. Getting offended over a blessing? I dont say to get a blessing back. I say it because my God says to bless my friends and my enemies the same. So I dont pick and choose who to bless. If you dont want a blessing let me know and I wont deal with you. Being so petty and judging me because of it lets me know you’re either an unbeliever or lukewarm Christian ashamed of God. I’ll pray for you (you probably don’t like that either) but when you tell me I can’t be myself PLUS I cant glorify God, I’m concerned. 
 I say it to show that I wish all the best for that person and that it hopefully shows the person that I am open to talk about God. I never ever expected it to be said back. I can see how through conditioning we feel a pressure to say it back. 
 Your conditioning should be with God and not the people around you in which you have no knowledge of the essence of their belief. 
 ummmmm, yeah. this article is stupid. “religious nuts ? we are on fire for God. God bless you! 
 I wouldn’t say stupid rather than a teaching moment. Everyone is not on the same spiritual level of understanding or acknowledgment. How many different bibles are there where people get their understanding of God? More than we can count. Different writings about a particular subject do not always mean the same thing. We learn, we share, we accept, we deny but all should be done with love. If God called you today and to me that means you die, expire, no longer living, brain dead which ever you choose means the same to most but medically there are those who will give you an in depth explanation about the death of a human flesh body. We as humans are always opinionated. Reply in kind, you do not have to agree just be kind. 
 I usually feel the real geniune desire to say to people “God Bless you , 
 But I know God blesses, not because I said it…I mean who am I? And I know I have been annoying to nonbelievers, more than once. In the other hand I don’t want it to become a common thing to say, I mean, it’s from the heart, and it’s using the Name of God. I don’t want to make it commonplace. 
 On the other hand I’ve felt grateful and really blessed and surprised once when my boss said it to me. I think it depends on the ocassion and on the intention of the heart. 
 I think it should be said, but should be said wisely. 
 Well for me I guess that “God bless you  should come along with praying to God for that person (It’s easier to say “God Bless you  than to spend time in prayer for the people you want to be blessed.) 
 There are so many other things that Jesus would have us be cautious about saying! I don’t think this such a big deal. If one says it with good intentions & means what they say, I see nothing wrong with it. In fact, saying it to non-Christians can be a way of introducing a Gospel-sharing moment! 
 Sarah, I agree with you 100% – it is a way to introduce a Gospel-sharing moment and create an opening to tell them about Jesus! 
 When I think people are particularly nice to me and I get a good feeling about them, I say God bless you. I really want God to bless them for their kindness to me, and this prayer wish is my way of reciprocating the kindness. 
 If these phrases seem trite to you, why don’t you think about what we might say that will really make a difference in the lives we share a few words with? 
 Brother I don’t know you or your life but God does, he knows your heart, and from a man’s heart the mouth speaketh. If mentioning the lord offends you, maybe you might consider a little knee time with the father, (not telling you what to do or judging you) confessing Jesus before men will get Jesus to confess you before the father. (This we want) Jesus says if you are ashamed of me, I will be ashamed of you and confess to the father I never you. Thus you will burn in hell, son this is a battle for your soul, (in my opinion) you should dump those feelings and put on some humility son he’s you’re father, treat him like it 
 I have found in customer service when a person acts like they want to cuse you out, they’ll said have a blessed day. And it is clear that is not well intended. I am black, and see this in the black community. I think it is passive a aggressive cop out. 
 Everyone responds to questions in the way they were raised or by what they have learned. People’s lives usually change depending on who they spend time with. We pick up other people’s habits by what seems appealing to us. People who are trying to get more people to join their church will try to get you to attend services. On the other hand people who may try to get you to join their circle would try to incorporate their way of speaking on you? I don’t think so most of the time people as you say are just responding to you. What are they getting from your conversations? Are you talking of problems? They may seem to want God’s help for you. God steps in when we do not know what to pray for if you are sincere. You don’t seem to think God is a part of your life therefore part of your conversation. He should be your life always not only when you think it available. Romans 8:26 King James Version – Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. What do you think is the sincerity of God in your life? It doesn’t matter what He is in someone else’ life, that is between them and Him. I am careful who I share the word of God with. The word of God is precious pearls to be handled with care because He is Holier than thou. When you get closer to God and understand the reason for Him in your life frivolous things said by other people won’t matter to you. It shouldn’t. God does not compare you with others, that would not be fair to you or others. He is fair as He would expect you to be. God, totally faithful and true and full of grace and mercy. This could be the longest comment so I will stop with this, trust in God but that too is a lesson for you to learn under the tutelage of a learned scholar. Someone who could guide your questions on the path of righteousness if that is what you are looking for. When you ask questions and you get answers remember the pearls given to you are precious. Use them wisely as God speaking to you. He is your Father who created you because He wanted someone just like you. You matter to Him let Him matter to you and everything else will work out, I promise. 
 Whenever I give to others, mostly outside of gas stations and what not, they always tell me “God bless you ; as did the person I just gave to. My response was “same to you . Afterwards I realized that I should have responded with the same that you’ve mentioned when you stated, “God has blessed me, and you also . I’m thinking that he most probably doesn’t know that he has also been blessed. Not going much into that and my assumptions. Just so happened to google and saw you’re take on the response and mine are the same. 

 id="file23242565" filename="the-blessing-is-all-that-matters" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://testdrivingtheology.org/2014/11/03/the-blessing-is-all-that-matters/">
 The Blessing is All That Matters 
 “The Blessing Is All That Matters  Matthew 5:1-12 Pastor Todd Buegler Trinity Lutheran Church November 1-2, 2014 All Saints Weekend 
 Grace and peace to you from God our Creator, and from our Savior, Jesus Christ, who brings hope. Amen. 
 The blessing was all that mattered. (If you’re a 7th, 8th or 9th grader taking worship notes for confirmation, I’ll give you a hint…here’s the thing you should write down): “The blessing was all that mattered.  
 You’re welcome. 
 You might remember the Old Testament story of Jacob and Esau. Twins, the sons of Isaac and Rebekah, this clan set the standard, a new high bar, for family dysfunction for thousands of years. Jacob and Esau were always very jealous of each other, and to say they were competitive would be an understatement. Easu was born first, but the scriptures tell us that during childbirth, Jacob was literally holding on to Esau’s foot, as if to try and pull him back into the womb so that Jacob could be born first. 
 Esau was a big, strong, hairy man…and was favored by his father. Jacob was smaller, softer, and relied more on his intellect. He was favored by his Mother. 
 In Jewish tradition, before a Father’s death, he would give his “blessing  to the oldest Son. Now you have to understand that the giving of a blessing was a huge deal in the Jewish culture. A father had one blessing to give…and really it equated more to our idea of “inheritance.  To give a blessing was to give everything…the wisdom and experience of the Father, the family land, the family property, and the role of family patriarch. Really it was a matter of transferring the family identity from one male family leader to the next. 
 It would kind of roughly be like this. <walk up to someone> Here, here’s my wallet…here is my cell phone…here are my keys. Now, you pretty much have complete control of my life…you have my stuff. My house…my car…you can get into my bank accounts on my phone…my ID…our airline tickets for vacation are on there…you have my identity. <start to return to pulpit> On second thought… 
 So to give the blessing was to give everything. In Jewish culture, the word “blessing  meant a lot. You didn’t say “bless you  unless you really meant it. So the story goes on and has Jacob and his Mother scheming to steal the blessing from Esau. Why? Well, the Blessing was all that mattered. 
 Contrast that with the way we understand the word “blessings  today. We use that word all the time. I sign letters my letters and emails with the phrase “God bless you!  When children come forward for communion, we bless them. I’ve had restaurant waitresses (usually in the south) end our interactions by saying to me “bless you sweetie!  I was sitting down at Central Park coffee last week…it was still allergy season and I sneezed. Someone four tables away shouted “Bless You!  Thanks! 
 We talk all the time about the abundance of blessings that come from God. And while it’s good to recognize and understand these things, I think maybe we’ve lost some of the majesty of what it really means to be blessed. 
 So fast-forward with me a couple of thousand years to the time of Jesus. Our Gospel text today from Matthew 5 is commonly called the Beatitudes. Jesus had gone with his disciples up onto a mountain. He would often retreat this way, presumably to rest, and recharge. But on this day he sat down with the disciples and began teaching: 
 Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted. 
 Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth. 
 Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be filled. 
 Blessed are the merciful, for they will receive mercy. 
 Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God. 
 Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called children of God. 
 Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
 Blessed are you when people revile you and persecute you and utter all kinds of evil against you falsely on my account. 
 9 different times in the beatitudes, Jesus uses the word blessed. 9 times! Now we hear that, with our cultural understanding of the word blessed, and we think to ourselves “oh…that sounds nice.  We hear it as a presecriptive phrase…as in that’s what’s going to happen. Yes, someday, the poor will receive what is due them…yes, someday those who mourn will get over their grief…yes, the meek…someday they will get their inheritance. For us, these phrases are just that…phrases. The kind of things we might put on the front of a nice greeting card. 
 But for the disciples, men who had been steeped in the Jewish tradition, Jesus’ teaching, the beatitude…would have completely rocked their world. 
 Because the beatitudes were not presecriptive…they were descriptive. Jesus was describing how God worked in the world right then and there, not how it someday might be. And he was intentionally using the word “blessed . 
 Jesus was saying “blessed are  in present tense. In other words: 
 God’s blessing: his inheritance, his identity, his whole self…has already been given to the poor in spirit. 
 God’s inheritance, God’s identity, God’s whole self…it has already been given to the meek. 
 God’s inheritance has been given to the peacemakers. 
 God’s inheritance has been given to the hungry, to the pure in spirit, to the merciful, to those who have been persecuted. 
 During Jesus’ time, for those who lived in a culture where inheritance was based on birth order and social class, Jesus was completely turning the tables and changing their understanding of who God was for! 
 And this was doubly shocking for the disciples who sat with Jesus that day, because he was telling them that the “system  of blessing and inheritance that they had grown up with was going to change…and he was telling them that they, the disciples, and all of God’s people are the full inheritors of God’s grace, of God’s love, of eternal life. This was their identity…God was claiming them as his own. It had to be a jaw-dropping moment for the disciples. 
 And, it should be for us. Because in the beatitudes, Jesus is making this same claim on our behalf. 
 Blessed are the poor in spirit…yeah, that can be me. 
 Blessed are the meek? Yes, from time to time. 
 Blessed are the peacemakers? I hope so. And so on. 
 In the waters of baptism we all heard the words where God claims us as his own: “You have been sealed by the Holy Spirit and marked with the cross of Christ.  You are claimed! You have an inheritance! You are blessed! You are blessed! 
 These are incredibly helpful and hopeful words for me to hear today. 
 Because this is the day that we celebrate “All Saints Sunday.  This is the day that we hear the names of those from our community, our friends, our family members, who have died in the past year. This is the day that their name is followed by the ringing of a bell. This is the day that we might light candles to remember them. 
 We all have people to remember. 
 I have Jerry Allan Buegler. Born November 27, 1936. Died January 9, 1999. My father. 
 I have grandparents, Elmer and Gertie Buegler. Elmer worked for Woolworth’s, he opened new stores all around the Midwest, she was a homemaker…and then Elliott and Grace Moody, farmers from near St. James. 
 I have a father-in law, Lyle Tjosaas. A dairy farmer, a Dodge county commissioner, a father of 7; Grandfather to my boys. 
 I have a good friend, Jim Campbell. A photographer and college buddy. One of the funniest people I ever knew. 
 I have experienced loss. I have many others, who I have come to know and walk with over the years, who have joined what the apostle Paul called the “Great Cloud of Witnesses  who have gone before. 
 We all have our names. Pause, and think for a moment, who are your names? <pause> We have all heard their names read. Perhaps we have heard a bell ring. Maybe we lit a candle. 
 We have all experienced the grief of losing someone we were close to. And so hearing the beatitudes today gives me great peace and great hope. 
 It gives me peace because I know that my father…who I still miss dearly, 15 years after his death, who I’d trade almost anything to have one more conversation with, I know that he heard those words. “Jerry Allan Buegler, you are sealed with the Holy Spirit and marked with the cross of Christ forever.  
 With these words, my Dad was received his blessing…his inheritance. And now in death he is fully experiencing that gift and grace, in that his relationship with Jesus is whole. 
 It gives me peace to know that my Grandparents were blessed, and received their inheritance. 
 My father-in-law Lyle, only gone a little over a year now, and whose loss is still an open wound; this text reminds me that he was blessed. And that he received his inheritance. 
 My friend Jim, who died in an accident in Colorado; the same. He received the blessing. 
 They are among the saints who have gone before, who received God’s blessing and inheritance. And on days like this, when we remember and we grieve, knowing this brings me peace. 
 It also brings me hope. I have hope because I know that someday, my name will be on the list that is read. Someday, the bell will ring for me. 
 It will hopefully be a long time from now. Hopefully when my name is read people will say “Pastor Todd? Oh yeah, he’s that old pastor who retired what…40, 45 years ago?  Hopefully. But you never know. 
 And that not knowing is a part of our life, and a part of our faith. And that is why I choose to trust in my blessing…my inheritance. It can be what gives me hope. 
 We have to be honest, and we have to acknowledge that someday, all of our names will be on this list. Someday the bell will ring for all of us. Because the last time I checked, the human mortality rate was still somewhere right around 100%. But as God’s children, we have this blessing. As surely as Isaac blessed Jacob, God blesses us. 
 Without the blessing, without the promise of the inheritance, we would look to our future with a sense of emptiness. 
 But with this blessing, you are a child of God, sealed by the Holy Spirit and marked with the cross of Christ forever. 
 You are blessed. You are inheritors of eternal life. You are a part of the great cloud of witnesses. You are a child of God who received a blessing. 
 And the blessing is all that matters. 
 Amen. 
 Share this: 
 Like this: 
 Like Loading... 
 Published by tbuegler 
 Husband, father, reader, guitar player, pastor, a person who is really banking on that whole grace thing! View all posts by tbuegler 

 id="file23242563" filename="the-blessing-of-fruitfulness" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://redemptivehistorytheology.com/blog/chapter-3-the-image-of-god-genesis-126-31/the-blessing-of-fruitfulness/">
 The Blessing of Fruitfulness 
 d) Gen 1:28: This text sits at the heart of western religious tradition concerning humanity’s place in our world.[1] 
 It states, “And God blessed them and said to them, ‘Be fruitful and become numerous and fill the earth and subdue it and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and the birds of the heavens, and over all the living things which move about on the land.’  
 People who do not follow Christ remain in the image of God (Gen 1:26). This enables them to retain some glimmers of truth in their conception of God and of humanity.[2] 
 An Akkadian text asserts that the formation of the earth and of people were divine processes: 
 When the god Anu created heaven, [when] the god [of waters] created the…ocean, his dwelling, the god Ea pinched off a piece of clay in the…ocean, created the [brick god] for the restoration of [temples], created the reed marsh and the forest for the work of their construction, created the gods…to be the completers of their construction work, created mountains and oceans for everything… 
 [created] the abundant products [of mountain and ocean] to be offerings…created the deities…to be presenters of offerings, created the god Kusug, high priest of the great gods, to be the one who completes their rites and ceremonies, created the king to be the provider…created men to be the makers.[3] 
 However, Gen 1 differs from the Ancient Near Eastern (ANE) conception of the world by asserting that only one God ultimately wields power in the universe. Furthermore, he granted jurisdiction to people made in his image, rather than to lesser gods.[4] 
 The Lord commissioned Adam and Eve to expand Eden until paradise covers the whole earth, so that everyone could see that the Lord rules through the work of his images (Eph 3:8–10).[5] 
 By procreating, they would create additional images of God to fill the earth, God’s temple (Isa 66:1).[6] 
 Yet humans do not possess absolute dominion. Our rule must align with God’s intentions for the earth and its creatures. He intended for us to fill the earth and rule as benevolent kings and queens (Ps 8:3–9).[7] 
 In the same way that God blessed the animals in Gen 1:22, he immediately granted the first humans with the ability to reproduce.[8] 
 Since God directly endows humanity with the means to propagate life, this undercuts all rationale for fertility cults in which people which people engaged in ritual sex to entreat the gods to create and sustain life.[10] 
 Given that God described reproduction as a blessing in Gen 1:28, we should understand it as a privilege, rather than a command to obey. Those who choose not to have children do not violate Scriptural obligations. 
 The Lord gave this blessing so humanity might fill the earth. How wonderful it would be if we succeeded in utilizing our spiritual privileges as well as we have this physical one (Matt 28:18–20).[11] 
 The Lord also blessed humanity with the ability to “subdue the earth  and “have dominion  over the animals. 
 Typically, the term “to subdue  (kavash) refers to subjecting someone to slavery, physically assaulting a person, treading underfoot, or subjugating people with military power (Esth 7:7–8; Jer 34:11; Mic 7:19; Num 32:29). 
 However, in this context, the word likely described creating civilizations and fostering agriculture and animal husbandry (Gen 2:5–6, 15).[12] 
 Other cultures within the ANE viewed these tasks as the prerogative of the gods and their offspring, the kings.[13] 
 I greatly befriended the gods of Assyria, who exalt the great gods in their shrines…[I am the] maker of Assyria, who completes its metropolis; [I am the] subduer… 
 [who makes obedient] the enemies’ land, destroyer of their towns; who digs canals, opens wells, runs irrigation ditches, who brings plenty and abundance to the wide acres of Assyria, who furnishes water for irrigation to Assyria’s meadows—engineering and construction such as none had seen in Assyria in the days of old.[14] 
 People in the ANE viewed enabling agricultural use of previously unfruitful land as one facet of subduing it. 
 The word translated as “have dominion  or “rule over  (radah) contains the nuance of using authority which one has been granted by another (1 Ki 4:24; Ps 110:1–2). It refers to priests and administrators fulfilling their duties, kings and tribes ruling over other people, and even shepherds with their sheep.[15] 
 God expected Israelite kings to uphold the welfare of their subjects, especially the poor and weak (Ps 72:12–14; Prov 31:4–9).[16] He prohibited abuse and neglect (Ezek 34:1–10).[17] 
 Similarly, he calls us to rule over nature benevolently.[18] 
 Just as the Lord brought structure to the cosmos, our subduing and having dominion should bring order to the world.[19] God intended Adam and Eve to expand Eden into habitable places for his glory.[20] 
 The site of this [new city] none among the 350 ancient princes who lived before me, who exercised dominion over Assyria and ruled the subjects of [the great god] Enlil, had thought of nor did they know how to settle it, nor did they think of digging its canal or setting out its orchards: to settle that city, to build its great shrines, the abodes of the great gods, and the palace for my royal abode, day and night I planned it. I gave the order and I commanded that it be built.[21] 
 Ancient Assyrians associated the exercise of dominion with bringing order to the land. 
 As God’s image-bearers, we must fulfill the privileges of subduing and wielding dominion as the Lord did when he formed the cosmos,[22] creating order from chaos and caring for the creatures he made.[23] 
 This includes domesticating and managing the animals which populate the earth.[24] As the Lord’s representatives, we rule over them on God’s behalf.[25] 
 Since we are made in God’s image, he has conferred upon us his dignity, entrusted us with his authority, and endowed us with the capacity to imitate him. While all of humanity bears the image of God, the presence of the Spirit greatly enhances those capabilities within those whom the Lord has redeemed.[26] 
 As Christians, we tend to think of bringing healing to the world spiritually by extending God’s offer of salvation to others (Luke 7:44–50). However, the Lord also calls us to pursue physical healing, social justice, and environmental restoration (Luke 7:20–23; Luke 4:14–19; Rom 8:19–23). 
 While we wait expectantly for the ushering in of the new age, we must fully engage ourselves in the advancement of the cause of Christ. This involves pursuing the righteousness, equity, and eternal life which God intended from the beginning.[27] 
 If the Lord cares for creation enough to restore it in the age to come, then, surely, we who seek to align ourselves with him should nurture it as well. 
 Nevertheless, we must remain cognizant that, although they are not in vain, our own efforts cannot bring a complete end to the groaning around us. God himself will accomplish that.[28] 
 In the meantime, we function as stewards of the cosmos which God has created for himself. We manage it for the glory of the earth’s true owner.[29] 
 A key focus of biblical ethics consists of loving our neighbors as ourselves (Lev 19:18; Mark 12:28–34). The harsh realities of the ecological crises around the world force us to consider whether we can truly love our neighbors without caring for the environments in which they live.[30] 
 For example, Noah, a man who was uniquely righteousness among his neighbors, ensured the preservation of nonhuman life (Gen 6:9; Gen 7:1–5; Prov 12:10).[31] 
 People placed an image of a god in a temple to carry out the deity’s will and work.[32] 
 In keeping with this, Assurbanipal (668–626 BC) wrote, “The great gods, whose name I called upon, extolling their glory…commanded that I should exercise sovereignty [and] assigned me the task of adorning their sanctuaries. [33] 
 Similarly, Moses’s original readers understood that God created Adam and Eve to serve as his ambassadors. He authorized them to fulfill his purposes by faithfully tending, guarding, and governing the earth (Gen 2:15) while displaying the Lord’s glory and extending God’s kingdom.[34] 
 In order to accomplish this cultural mandate,[35] God endowed Adam and Eve with his own gifts and abilities. 
 He enabled them to function perfectly in full relationships with God and with each other as they carried out his purposes:[36] expanding the paradise in which they lived throughout the earth,[37] until the whole world serves as God’s temple.[38] 
 Read Gen 1:28. What blessing and mandate did the Lord give to Adam and Eve? How can you fulfill it today? 
 [2] Beale, The Temple and the Church’s Mission: A Biblical Theology of the Dwelling Place of God, 88. 
 [3]A. Sachs, trans., “Ritual for the Repair of a Temple,  in ANET, text c, lines 24–37, 341–2. Italics mine. 
 [5] Beale, The Temple and the Church’s Mission: A Biblical Theology of the Dwelling Place of God, 81–2. 
 [6]Dennis R. Venema and Scot McKnight, Adam and the Genome: Reading Scripture After Genetic Science (Grand Rapids: Brazos, 2017), electronic version, loc. 3035 of 5792. 
 [7] Waltke and Fredricks, Genesis: A Commentary, 67. 
 [8] Hamilton, The Book of Genesis, Chapters 1–17, 139. 
 [20] Beale, The Temple and the Church’s Mission: A Biblical Theology of the Dwelling Place of God, 82. 
 [23] Beale, The Temple and the Church’s Mission: A Biblical Theology of the Dwelling Place of God, 83. 
 [27]Roy E. Ciampa, “Genesis 1–3 and Paul’s Theology of Adam’s Dominion in Romans 5–6,  in From Creation to New Creation: Biblical Theology and Exegesis (ed. Daniel M. Gurtner and Benjamin L. Gladd; Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2013), 115. 
 [32] Beale, The Temple and the Church’s Mission: A Biblical Theology of the Dwelling Place of God, 83. 
 [35] Per Beale, this promise of fruitful multiplying recurs in the OT fifteen times (The Temple and the Church’s Mission: A Biblical Theology of the Dwelling Place of God, 265). 
 [37]Kline, Kingdom Prologue: Genesis Foundations for a Covenantal Worldview, 70. 
 [38] Beale, The Temple and the Church’s Mission: A Biblical Theology of the Dwelling Place of God, 97–8. 

 id="file23242803" filename="the-nuptial-blessing" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.foryourmarriage.org/the-nuptial-blessing/">
 The Nuptial Blessing 
 The Nuptial Blessing is a beautiful moment in the Catholic wedding ceremony. It takes place after the bride and groom have exchanged their consent and so have become husband and wife. In this blessing, the celebrant (priest or deacon) prays for the married couple and asks that God give them special graces, including fidelity, the blessing of children, and a long life together. The prayer is filled with Scriptural allusions, going all the way back to the book of Genesis and its description of the way God created the universe and brought together the first man and woman to be “one flesh . 
 In the wedding liturgy, the Nuptial Blessing takes place after the couple has exchanged consent and given each other rings. If the wedding takes place within Mass, the blessing comes after the Our Father is said or sung. The Nuptial Blessing is also part of the ceremony when the wedding takes place without Mass and in the marriage of a Catholic and non-Christian (although there is the option in the latter ceremony to replace it with a shorter prayer). 
 The words of the Nuptial Blessing are worth meditating on, not only for engaged couples preparing for their wedding but also for married couples at any stage. There are three versions of the prayer to choose from in the Order of Celebrating Matrimony; the first is reproduced here. 
 The Nuptial Blessing 
 O God, who by your mighty power created all things out of nothing, and, when you had set in place the beginnings of the universe, formed man and woman in your own image, making the woman an inseparable helpmate to the man, that they might be no longer two, but one flesh, and taught that what you were pleased to make one must never be divided; 
 O God, who consecrated the bond of Marriage by so great a mystery that in the wedding covenant you foreshadowed the Sacrament of Christ and his Church; 
 O God, by whom woman is joined to man and the companionship they had in the beginning is endowed with the one blessing not forfeited by original sin nor washed away by the flood. 
 Look now with favor on these your servants, joined together in Marriage, who ask to be strengthened by your blessing. Send down on them the grace of the Holy Spirit and pour your love into their hearts, that they may remain faithful in the Marriage covenant. 
 May the grace of love and peace abide in your daughter [name], and let her always follow the example of those holy women whose praises are sung in the Scriptures. 
 May her husband entrust his heart to her, so that, acknowledging her as his equal and his joint heir to the life of grace, he may show her due honor and cherish her always with the love that Christ has for his Church. 
 And now, Lord, we implore you: may these your servants hold fast to the faith and keep your commandments; made one in the flesh, may they be blameless in all they do; and with the strength that comes from the Gospel, may they bear true witness to Christ before all; (may they be blessed with children, and prove themselves virtuous parents, who live to see their children’s children.) 
 And grant that, reaching at last together the fullness of years for which they hope, they may come to the life of the blessed in the Kingdom of Heaven. Through Christ our Lord. 
 Amen. 
 Note: the words in parentheses may be omitted if it seems that circumstances suggest it, for example, if the bride and bridegroom are advanced in years. 
 Featured Resource 
 Daily Marriage Tip 
 New Year’s Eve is a great time for a family “year in review.  What were some highs and lows from the year? How did you grow as a family? What do you hope for in the new year? 
 Don't Miss Out 
 For Your Marriage is here to support you! If you’re looking for inspiration, resources and thought-provoking content, check out our monthly newsletter. 
 SPONSORED BY 
 AFFILIATED SITES 
 DISCLAIMER 
 Throughout www.foryourmarriage.org, links to other websites are provided solely for the user’s convenience. USCCB assumes no responsibility for these websites, their content, or their sponsoring organizations. 

 id="file23242568" filename="theology" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.blessingsoflifeministry.com/theology">
 Theology 
 As I offer supply preaching, it felt important to explain my theology. I am a Christian and believe we are all children of a God who loves us. 
 I believe in an afterlife: heaven and hell. 
 I believe in the sanctity of marriage: between two people who love and honor each other, regardless of race or creed or gender or type of spiritual belief in God. 
 I believe God has many names. 
 I believe as children of God, we are called to love one another – with respect – always. 
 I believe if a relationship is abusive or unhealthy, a divorce can be a blessing for all. 
 I do not believe God causes bad things to happen or that God wants us to suffer. 
 I believe God gave humans a free will. 
 Humans make mistakes and their consequences affect us and others. 
 We are all sinners. 
 When bad things happen, I believe God walks with us and often carries us. 
 I believe God sends us angels and guides when we are most in need. 
 I believe in daily prayer; and it is critical to wait and listen for God’s response; and thank God for blessings given. I believe music to God is so powerful, it is like praying twice, maybe more! 
 In prayers it is important to understand God often has a tremendous sense of humor, especially when we plan without God’s input. 
 In youth ministry, we often teach children and youth to have a Plan A, B or C or ... In the pandemic, it often feels like: Plan D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K … 
 It is so important to try to laugh through our tears, AND it is always ok to have a strong conversation with God when we are angry or frustrated with God. 
 Reverend Jody preparing for worship 
 "Beloved, let us love one another; because love is from God, everyone who loves is born of God and knows God." 

 id="file23242854" filename="theology" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.undergraduate.study.cam.ac.uk/courses/theology">
 Theology, Religion, and Philosophy of Religion 
 In view of the COVID-19 public health emergency, we may need to make changes to the course details outlined on these pages. Offers holders will be notified of changes. Please see this page for further information. 
 This uniquely personalised degree allows you to explore contemporary and historic thought, culture and texts through philosophy, ethics, history, literature, languages, social sciences and classics. 
 Container 
 Overview 
 Inter-disciplinary, supportive, outstanding 
 Worldwide, six out of seven people describe themselves as religious, with religious beliefs driving social and political change globally. As a graduate of our Faculty, you will be well equipped to play an important part in this world, valued for your intercultural literacy, critical thinking, research skills and understanding of the depth and nuance of human experience. 
 Theology, Religion, and Philosophy of Religion at Cambridge addresses fundamental questions through a range of religious traditions and philosophical standpoints. Encompassing the history, practice and thought of the major world religions of Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, Islam and Judaism, the course develops your understanding of the significance of religion and its cultural contexts. 
 World class resources 
 We offer outstanding teaching and a supportive, friendly faculty of experts. You will have access to the latest research and historic resources both within the Faculty, and across the Colleges and University, including, for example, the Codex Bezae (an important early version of the New Testament), the Genizah collection (a globally significant source for medieval Judaism) and the vast collection of artefacts in the Fitzwilliam Museum. 
 Course costs 
 Tuition fees 
 Information on tuition fee rates for Theology, Religion, and Philosophy of Religion is available on the tuition fees page. 
 Additional course costs 
 There are no compulsory course costs for Theology, Religion, and Philosophy of Religion. Some students may want to buy a book to help with their chosen scriptural language, and a scriptural text or translation, usually available for around £20 each. No additional book purchases are expected, with the Faculty Library housing over 60,000 volumes, including multiple copies of many books on the course reading lists. Full course details are available on the Faculty of Divinity website and if you have any queries about resources/materials, please contact the Faculty. 
 Changing course 
 Very few students decide that our course isn’t for them (it is much more common for students from other courses to change to TRPR). However, if you would like to change course, you need the agreement of your College that any change is in your educational interests, and you must have the necessary background in the subject to which you wish to change – in some cases you may be required to undertake some catch-up work or take up the new course from the start/an earlier year. If you think you may wish to change course, we encourage you to contact a College admissions office for advice. You should also consider if/how changing course may affect any financial support arrangements. 
 As well as the full three-year course, it's possible to study one or two years of Theology, Religion, and Philosophy of Religion, either before or after one or two years of another subject, such as English; Philosophy; Classics; History; Human, Social, and Political Sciences; Law; Asian and Middle Eastern Studies; and History of Art. 
 Excellent career prospects 
 Our course equips students with skills valued across a wide range of professions, with graduates of the Faculty enjoying successful careers in the Civil Service, law, international development, the arts, banking, investment, teaching, the media and communications. A considerable proportion of our students develop a life-long love of learning and research, and continue to further study in theology and related disciplines. 
 Advanced Diploma 
 The Faculty offers a one-year diploma for those who haven’t studied religion at undergraduate level but have a degree in another subject. Contact the Faculty Office (see fact file, right) for more information. 
 This course was formerly known as Theology and Religious Studies. 
 Course Outline 
 Course outline 
 Teaching is through lectures, classes and supervisions. You can expect up to nine hours of classes and lectures each week (including six for non-language papers and three for languages), as well as a weekly supervision. 
 Assessment is mainly by three-hour written examinations, but some papers are assessed by coursework. 
 Year 1 (Part I) 
 You take five papers designed to give you a broad introduction to the concepts, knowledge and skills required in the main areas of study. The course is designed to accommodate students studying religion for the first time. You choose: 
 a paper in biblical studies, either David: Israel’s Greatest Hero? or Jesus and the Origins of the Gospel (you can take the other in place of one of the choices below) 
 one scriptural language (studied from scratch, no prior knowledge is expected) – Hebrew, New Testament Greek, Qur’anic Arabic or Sanskrit 
 Plus three other papers from a choice of six, currently: 
 Christianity and the Transformation of Culture – the study of processes of conversion and Christianization in the late Roman world 
 The Question of God – exploring some of the major themes of Christian theology 
 Understanding Contemporary Religion – an introduction to the sociological study of religion 
 Studying World Religions – history, comparison and dialogue 
 Philosophy of Religion; and Ethics - these two papers introduce key questions in philosophy of religion and ethics, ranging from antiquity to contemporary controversies 
 Year 2 (Part IIA) 
 A wide choice of options is available, enabling you to develop a course suited to your own interests. Scriptural languages are optional at this stage and you are able to follow a joint track with Social Anthropology if you wish. 
 You choose four papers out of around 17, currently including: 
 Introduction to Islam 
 Ethics and Faith 
 Philosophy of Religion: God, Freedom and the Soul 
 The Johannine Tradition 
 Life and Thought of Religious Hinduism and of Buddhism 
 Christianity in Late Antiquity 
 You can also choose to take the Part IA Meaning paper from the Philosophy course, which will be taught alongside Philosophy students. 
 Year 3 (Part IIB) 
 In your final year, you choose four from a wide range of Special Subjects and interdisciplinary papers (topics may vary), such as: 
 Self and Salvation in Indian and Western Thought 
 You can choose to write a dissertation of 10,000 words in your third year instead of one paper. You may also continue with a scriptural language 
 For further information about studying Theology, Religion, and Philosophy of Religion at the University of Cambridge see the Faculty of Divinity website. 
 All undergraduate admissions decisions are the responsibility of the Cambridge Colleges. Please contact the relevant College admissions office if you have any queries about College-specific requirements. 
 Admission assessment 
 All applicants for Theology, Religion, and Philosophy of Religion are required to take a written assessment at interview, if interviewed. 
 Assessment format 
 Comprehension questions on a pre-recorded sample lecture (60 minutes) 
 You do not need to register or be registered in advance for the assessment at interview – Colleges will provide details of arrangements in their letters inviting applicants to interview. 
 Please note that your performance in the assessment at interview will not be considered in isolation, but will be taken into account alongside the other elements of your application. 
 Find out more about Theology and Religious Studies at Cambridge 
 Faculty of Divinity - Explore Divinity in more detail on the faculty website. 
 What can I study? - A detailed guide to the Theology, Religion, and Philosophy of Religion (TRPR) degree. 
 Introductory reading - Guidance on preparatory reading for applicants interested in Theology and Religious Studies. 
 Learning a Language - Read about what it’s like to learn a language from scratch in Divinity. 
 How do I apply? - Information about applying to study TRPR at Cambridge. 
 Meet Our Students - Read the views of some recent students in the Faculty of Divinity. 
 Alumni Profiles - Learn about the destinations of some recent Cambridge theology graduates. 
 Teaching and Assessment - How the course is taught and assessed at Cambridge and the support available. 
 50 Religious Treasures of Cambridge - An interactive resource introducing Key Stage 3 students to a range of artefacts and images associated with religion. 
 HE+ Resources - For 6th Form students who want to further their interest in the study of religion. 
 Discover Uni 
 Discover Uni data 
 Contextual information 
 Discover Uni allows you to compare information about individual courses at different higher education institutions. This can be a useful method of considering your options and what course may suit you best. 
 However, please note that superficially similar courses often have very different structures and objectives, and that the teaching, support and learning environment that best suits you can only be determined by identifying your own interests, needs, expectations and goals, and comparing them with detailed institution- and course-specific information. 
 We recommend that you look thoroughly at the course and University information contained on these webpages and consider coming to visit us on an Open Day, rather than relying solely on statistical comparison. 
 You may find the following notes helpful when considering information presented by Discover Uni. 
 Discover Uni relies on superficially similar courses being coded in the same way. Whilst this works on one level, it may lead to some anomalies. For example, Music courses and Music Technology courses can have exactly the same code despite being very different programmes with quite distinct educational and career outcomes. 
 Any course which combines several disciplines (as many courses at Cambridge do) tends to be compared nationally with courses in just one of those disciplines, and in such cases the Discover Uni comparison may not be an accurate or fair reflection of the reality of either. For example, you may find that when considering a degree which embraces a range of disciplines such as biology, physics, chemistry and geology (for instance, Natural Sciences at Cambridge), the comparison provided is with courses at other institutions that primarily focus on just one (or a smaller combination) of those subjects.You may therefore find that not all elements of the Cambridge degree are represented in the Discover Uni data. 
 Some contextual data linked from other surveys, such as the National Student Survey (NSS) or the Destination of Leavers in Higher Education (DLHE), may not be available or may be aggregated across several courses or several years due to small sample sizes. When using the data to inform your course choice, it is important to ensure you understand how it has been processed prior to its presentation. Discover Uni offers some explanatory information about how the contextual data is collated, and how it may be used, which you can view here: https://discoveruni.gov.uk/about-our-data/. 
 Discover Uni draws on national data to provide average salaries and employment/continuation data. Whilst starting salaries can be a useful measure, they do not give any sense of career trajectory or take account of the voluntary/low paid work that many graduates undertake initially in order to gain valuable experience necessary/advantageous for later career progression. Discover Uni is currently piloting use of the Longitudinal Education Outcomes (LEO) data to demonstrate possible career progression; it is important to note that this is experimental and its use may be modified as it embeds. 
 The above list is not exhaustive and there may be other important factors that are relevant to the choices that you are making, but we hope that this will be a useful starting point to help you delve deeper than the face value of the Discover Uni data. 
 Cambridge Admissions Office 
 Cambridge Admissions Office Student Services Centre New Museums Site Cambridge CB2 3PT 

 id="file23242821" filename="theology-and-the-english-language" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.religion-online.org/article/theology-and-the-english-language/">
 Theology and the English Language 
 In the mid-1970’s Owens was a student at the Iliff School of Theology in Denver. 
 This article appeared in the Christian Century, July 17, 1974, pp. 724-726. Copyright by The Christian Century Foundation; used by permission. Current articles and subscription information can be found at www.christiancentury.org. This material was prepared for Religion Online by Ted and Winnie Brock. 
 SUMMARY 
 Recent theological writing is imprecise and pretentious in the use of the language. More precision and clarity are needed in the writing of theology — along with a more careful examination of why and for whom it is being written. 
 For anyone surveying theology since the Reformation, English may seem the wrong language to examine. Surely German has been the language of theology for at least the past 400 years. But most theological work of note, in whatever language it is originally written, eventually gets translated into English, and it is through English that most of the world appropriates it, especially the theological students of North and South America and Asia. Since then the English language serves as a conveyor belt upon which ideas manufactured in Tübingen, Basel and Heidelberg -- or in Lyon, São Paulo and Uppsala -- are carried to the rest of the world, inspection of the machinery for possible faulty operation now and again might help to avert a breakdown along the way. I propose therefore to undertake at least a preliminary inspection, to offer a criticism of theology’s use of the English language. 
 Structures and Strictures 
 Language is one of those "visible and invisible" powers that we have to wrestle with. Language blesses us or enslaves us. It is a structure which makes chaos coherent, or it is a stricture which blocks the road to understanding. When the latter happens, language ceases to be the tool for transferring meaning from one person to others. No longer a basis for community, it becomes a barrier to understanding, a morass we must wade through to get to the other side. Even worse, it becomes not a tool but a weapon turned against ourselves. Such is the case of theology as presented in English today. I make no attempt to fix the blame for this situation, to say whether it lies with authors or with translators. Nor do I enter into the linguistic-analysis debate. My purpose is a much more homely one: to bring to the attention of writers and translators alike the bafflement in which their work leaves not only the American seminary student but also the besieged pastor in Bangkok or Bogotá. 
 This is not a call for a popularized version of theology, a Classic Comics series from Schleiermacher to James Cone. It is a call for more precision and clarity, whether in the initial work of composition or in the work of translation into English. And perhaps it is also a plea for more careful examination of why and for whom theology is currently written. As a service to the church, to the people of God? As a disguise for apologetics directed to an indifferent world? Or has theology fallen prey to the international beast that stalks all graduate schools: the desire to impress one’s colleagues and to develop a method of discourse so introverted that only the initiated can interpret it? There is more than one kind of speaking in tongues. 
 I take my cue from George Orwell’s "Politics and the English Language" (published in his Shooting an Elephant and Other Essays, 1945). The piece is a criticism of the way politics obscures meaning through slovenly use of words. In it Orwell lays down six basic rules for writers of English: 
 (i) Never use a metaphor, simile or other figure of speech which you are used to seeing in print. 
 (ii) Never use a long word where a short one will do. 
 (iii) If it is possible to cut a word out, always cut it out. 
 (iv) Never use the passive when you can use the active. 
 (v) Never use a foreign phrase, a scientific word or a jargon word if you can think of an everyday English equivalent. 
 (vi) Break any of these rules sooner than say anything outright barbarous. 
 To present-day theological writers these rules of Orwell’s, formulated in the 1940s, may seem somewhat simpleminded and even journalistic. There is about them a certain determined bustlingness that reminds one of the cleaning woman who turns you out in order to set your house to rights. His sleeves rolled up, a kerchief round his head and a feather duster in his hand, Orwell insists on whisking away all the filmy phrases you had draped with such studied negligence over the furniture. He throws out the flowers saved from the previous decade. He shakes the accumulated dust from the rugs and perhaps does not even put them back in the accustomed places. He opens the windows wide to let plenty of light and fresh air come in. And when he is through he stomps off stoically, knowing that the job will have to be endlessly repeated as long as humans continue to occupy the house. 
 Two Examples 
 Let me then take a few tentative swipes at the more obvious messes I have found around me as a student of theology. The two examples I choose, are from sources that will be easily accessible to both American and Third World pastors. 
 Such a problem would lead us to suggest that the only consistent alternatives would be either a radical, a historical translation as mentioned above, or -- if the historical framework of biblical thought were to be retained -- a systematic theology where the bridge between the centuries of biblical events and our own time was found in the actual history of the church as still ongoing history of God’s people. The blueprint of such a theology could be found in that self-understanding of Israel, both new and old, which descriptive biblical theology has laid bare as the common denominator of biblical thought. Such a theology would conceive of the Christian existence as a life by the fruits of God’s acts in Jesus Christ, rather than as a faith according to concepts deduced from the teaching of the prophets, Jesus, and Paul regarding God’s acts. It would exercise some of the same freedom which Paul’s and the other NT letters do when they refrain from any nostalgic attempts to play Galilee into their theology by transforming the teaching of Jesus’ earthly ministry into a system of theology and ethics [Krister Stendahl: "Biblical Theology, Contemporary," Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible (Abingdon, 1962), I, 428]. 
 Modes of religious experience are . . . shaped by cultural patterns. When social change jars the patterns, conventional ways of experiencing the holy disappear. When the thickly clotted symbol system of a pre-urban society is replaced by a highly differentiated and individuated urban culture, modalities of religious experience shift. When this happens gradually, over a long time span, the religious symbols have a chance to become adapted to the new cultural patterns. The experience of the death of the gods, or of God, is a consequence of an abrupt transition which causes the traditional symbols to collapse since they no longer illuminate the shifting social reality [Harvey Cox, "The Death of God and the Future of Theology," New Theology No. 4 (Macmillan, 1967), p. 245]. 
 Both these authors use a fair amount of metaphorical language -- an inevitability, since all language is in some way metaphorical. Even words that now signify the most abstract concept ("abstract" is a good example) once had quite concrete meanings. When one consciously uses concrete language to make the abstract visible or to interpret one concrete reality into another, then one is purposefully using metaphorical language. As Orwell says, "the sole aim of a metaphor is to call up a visual image." But he goes on: "When these images clash -- as in The Fascist octopus has sung its swan song, the jackboot is thrown into the melting pot -- it can be taken as certain that the writer is not seeing a mental image of the objects he is naming; in other words he is not really thinking." 
 Inept Metaphors 
 Stendahl begins by using architectural metaphors (framework, bridge, blueprint) and ends with a few miscellaneous figures (ongoing, laid bare, common denominator, the fruits, play Galilee into). In the first sentence, the main clause states that "the bridge between the centuries . . . was found [to be] ongoing." How interpret this image logically? Either the bridge has not yet been completed (which conflicts with the rest of the passage) or it is some sort of portable pontoon bridge. In the second sentence, descriptive biblical theology has "laid bare [a] blueprint [as a] common denominator." There seems to be no way of unscrambling such an image this side of Alice’s Wonderland. The next sentence contains only one clearly identifiable metaphor: "a life by the fruits of God’s acts in Jesus Christ." But just how are the fruits and the life related? Do the fruits sustain life? Are they to be cultivated? I find myself groping for meaning, especially when that phrase is juxtaposed with "a faith deduced according to concepts." Obviously (by the use of "rather than") these are meant to be polarities of Christian existence, but how and in what way? 
 "People who write in this manner," says Orwell, "usually have a general emotional meaning -- they dislike one thing and want to express solidarity with another -- but they are not interested in the detail of what they are saying." Stendahl’s emotional meaning first peeps through with the phrase "refrain from any nostalgic attempts to play Galilee into their theology." The reader has little trouble discerning that Stendahl intends to express solidarity with the exercise of freedom represented by Paul’s letters and that he dislikes the other side. But what it is he dislikes: is obscured by its inept metaphorical presentation. "Play" in what sense? Pretend ? Reproduce electronically? Toy with? Since there is in the rest of the sentence no corresponding image to make clear which he means. we are left with only the vague feeling that Stendahl does not approve of such goings on. 
 Harvey Cox’s use of images suffers from the same malaise. He has social change jarring the patterns of experience. That is quite conceivable -- until we come upon the verb "disappear." Things don’t disappear because they are jarred; they get off center, perhaps they even shatter, but they don’t simply evaporate. Of course, being true to the metaphor here would mean an entire re-evaluation of the premise. Next we have a "thickly clotted symbol system," which at first seems to hold interesting possibilities. But it is being replaced by "a highly differentiated and individuated urban culture," which is not described in images at all and which completely drains the initial image of meaning. Finally, we have symbols "collapsing" because they do not "illuminate" "shifting" reality. One can imagine symbols as searchlights seeking out a fugitive reality lurking in the shadows. But if the searchlight fails, does it collapse? Again, as with the patterns disappearing because they are jarred, a desire to overstate the case lies behind the myopic use of images. 
 False Limbs 
 Orwell next attacks what he calls "operators or false limbs" -- the shoddy phrases that slip so easily from the tongue (or the typewriter) and fill such embarrassingly large blanks both in the thought processes and on paper that we actually grow rather fond of them. "Render inoperative," "militate against," "have the effect of" -- these replace the simple verb (break, stop, change) with a phrase that further dilutes the already weak, all-purpose verb it contains. Thus one avoids being labeled polemical. 
 Take for example Stendahl’s opening phrase, "would lead us to suggest that." This makes his assumption seem simultaneously tentative and incontrovertible. Observe also how heavily Stendahl leans on the passive voice and the subjunctive mood: was found, could be found, would conceive of, would exercise. Cox too leans on the passive: shaped by, is replaced by, become adapted. And noun groups like "religious experience," "social change," "conventional ways," "cultural patterns" have become verbal counters that can no longer be redeemed for much in the way of hard meaning. 
 The most obvious flaw of any specialized writing is the jargon it uses -- the insiders’ language. In certain cases jargon is necessary for the sake of precision. This is especially true in the sciences, which must coin words to describe phenomena not previously observed. DNA, for example, is most succinctly called DNA. In fact when a scientist writes for other scientists his language becomes practically incomprehensible to outsiders. But when he writes for interested nonscientists, he goes to a great deal of trouble to explain himself graphically, sometimes even picturesquely. Thus we have "the biological soup" as a description of DNA. Look now at theologians and biblical scholars. They rarely deal with new discoveries that require them to invent a specialized language. Yet they are attached to certain words and phrases, such as "timeless kerygma," that can only be explained as elitisms. Probably the worst thing about the Cox paragraph is its truckling imitation of scientific jargon. The "modes" of the first sentence become "modalities" by the middle of the paragraph. And the "modalities" shift in response to "highly differentiated and individuated urban culture." Suppose you are a black minister who does not care to swathe himself in the trappings of white theology’s pretensions to scientific clubbishness. What are you. to make of such a bloodless corpse of a phrase? What is anyone to make of it? 
 One problem that afflicts us Orwell was spared. Unaware of the imminent television age, he had only to worry about the degradation of the English language by newspapers, pamphlets and radio. Even in 1984 he did not foresee the sensory free-for-all that we are the battered victims of. We, however, must cope with a new type of jargon whose aim is not to demonstrate superiority but to make a splash in Media City. How do you compete with a television film showing the slaughter of villagers? You proclaim the death of God. How do you avoid being shoved into the background, or indeed off-camera, by black power? You write black theology. How do you meet the charge of the human potential movement that Christianity is all a head-trip? You "do" theology (Doing theology is not to be confused with taking up one’s cross.) 
 A Theological Responsibility 
 Lest we think that theology is absolved from responsibility for guarding the powers of language, lest we suppose that there exists no tradition we can draw upon to instruct us in this task, let us listen again to Orwell, certainly no spokesman for the church or Christianity. He translates into modern scholarly English a familiar passage: 
 Objective consideration of contemporary phenomena compels the conclusion that success or failure in competitive activities exhibits no tendency to be commensurate with innate capacity, but that a considerable element of the unpredictable must invariably be taken into account. 
 Then he quotes the original: 
 I returned and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all. 

 id="file23242678" filename="theology-bless-fund" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://givingday.vanguard.edu/campaigns/theology-bless-fund">
 Theology: BLESS Fund 
 Project Overview 
 The Division of Theology wants to equip those called to preach and teach by supplying students with tools they need to study the Word. To achieve this goal, the BLESS Fund (Biblical Library Empowering Student Service) has been created to support the purchase of biblical studies tools that will be provided to theology students in the form of the Logos software library. Students will learn to use these resources while they study at Vanguard, and then take them upon their graduation to use wherever the Lord sends them in the world to serve Him for the rest of their lives. 
 Why should donors support this fund? 
 The BLESS Fund equips students to study, preach and teach the Word. You can be part of this ongoing Kingdom purpose by giving today to empower these students as they fulfill their callings. Now, more than ever, students need accessible resources, both during current pandemic realities, as well as after graduation while on the mission field, in local churches or wherever the Lord commissions them. Faculty members strongly support this fund with personal donations. We intend to see our students equipped and prepared, so the Word will continue going forth from VU alumni, as has been our mission from the beginning. The BLESS Fund enhances the experience of VU students by providing them with tools they need right now in their studies. These resources then remain theirs to use for the rest of their lives and in ministries to future generations. The BLESS Fund is entirely dedicated to the purchase of biblical studies software licenses for VU theology students. 
 How will funds be used? 
 The long-term goal is to raise $200,000 in the next four years to provide these resources for 250 students. Our current goal for Vanguard Giving Day is $15,000, which will provide the software library resources for 20 students. 
 Description 
 Vanguard Giving Day is back! Join us November 10 for our second annual Vanguard Giving Day as we rally our pride for one purpose: to ensure generations of students have access to the transformative educational experience for which Vanguard is known. 
 Last year, our community of generosity raised more than $330,000 for programs across campus. Join us this year as we strive to make a greater impact in the lives of our students, faculty, staff, alumni and the entire Vanguard community! 
 Theology: BLESS Fund 
 Project Overview 
 The Division of Theology wants to equip those called to preach and teach by supplying students with tools they need to study the Word. To achieve this goal, the BLESS Fund (Biblical Library Empowering Student Service) has been created to support the purchase of biblical studies tools that will be provided to theology students in the form of the Logos software library. Students will learn to use these resources while they study at Vanguard, and then take them upon their graduation to use wherever the Lord sends them in the world to serve Him for the rest of their lives. 
 Why should donors support this fund? 
 The BLESS Fund equips students to study, preach and teach the Word. You can be part of this ongoing Kingdom purpose by giving today to empower these students as they fulfill their callings. Now, more than ever, students need accessible resources, both during current pandemic realities, as well as after graduation while on the mission field, in local churches or wherever the Lord commissions them. Faculty members strongly support this fund with personal donations. We intend to see our students equipped and prepared, so the Word will continue going forth from VU alumni, as has been our mission from the beginning. The BLESS Fund enhances the experience of VU students by providing them with tools they need right now in their studies. These resources then remain theirs to use for the rest of their lives and in ministries to future generations. The BLESS Fund is entirely dedicated to the purchase of biblical studies software licenses for VU theology students. 
 How will funds be used? 
 The long-term goal is to raise $200,000 in the next four years to provide these resources for 250 students. Our current goal for Vanguard Giving Day is $15,000, which will provide the software library resources for 20 students. 

 id="file23242690" filename="theology-of-latin-and-easternrite-liturgies-4655" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.ewtn.com/catholicism/library/theology-of-latin-and-easternrite-liturgies-4655">
 Theology of Latin- and Eastern-Rite Liturgies 
 Author: Father Edward McNamara, LC 
 A ZENIT DAILY DISPATCH 
 Theology of Latin- and Eastern-Rite Liturgies 
 ROME, 13 NOV. 2012 (ZENIT) Answered by Legionary of Christ Father Edward McNamara, professor of liturgy at the Regina Apostolorum University. 
 Q: Is there any difference between the holy Mass of the Latin rite and the Mass of the Eastern rites such as the Ukrainian or Syro-Malabar? Is there any difference in the theology behind them? — M.M., Ottawa 
 A: The answer to the first question as to whether there is a difference in the Mass between the Roman rite and Eastern liturgies is fairly easy: No. It is the same Mass in every corner of the world. 
 The response to the second question with respect to the theology of Mass is somewhat more complex and could be characterized as no and yes at once. 
 The answer is no if by difference in theology we mean a difference regarding something essential. All liturgical families hold that the Eucharistic celebration is Christ's sacrifice made present through the intercession of the Holy Spirit. All believe that communion is receiving Christ's sacred body and blood. In other words, the essential aspects of Eucharistic theology are common to all. 
 The answer would be yes, however, if by difference we mean that the several rites, through their celebrations, tend to emphasize some facets of the one mystery more than others. 
 In this sense the theology of the Roman rite, and especially the first Eucharistic Prayer, continually underlines the theme of the acceptance of the sacrifice by the Father. Thus it begins: 
 "To you, therefore, most merciful Father, we make humble prayer and petition through Jesus Christ, your Son, our Lord: that you accept and bless these gifts, these offerings, these holy and unblemished sacrifices." 
 The prayers of intercession that follow expresses for whom this sacrifice is offered: the Church, pope, bishops, and those people present, who also offer the sacrifice for themselves and those dear to them. The reason they offer the sacrifice is: 
 "For the redemption of their souls, in hope of health and well-being, and paying their homage to you, the eternal God, living and true." 
 The theme of the acceptance of the sacrifice is again brought to the fore in other parts of the prayer: For example: 
 "Therefore, Lord, we pray: graciously accept this oblation of our service, that of your whole family; order our days in your peace, and command that we be delivered from eternal damnation and counted among the flock of those you have chosen. 
 "Be pleased, O God, we pray, to bless, acknowledge, and approve this offering in every respect. … 
 "Be pleased to look upon these offerings with a serene and kindly countenance, and to accept them, as once you were pleased to accept the gifts of your servant Abel the just, the sacrifice of Abraham, our father in faith, and the offering of your high priest Melchizedek, a holy sacrifice, a spotless victim. 
 "In humble prayer we ask you, almighty God: command that these gifts be borne by the hands of your holy Angel to your altar on high …." 
 We have used the Roman Canon as this best illustrates the theological tradition of this rite. The other Eucharistic Prayers either follow this same tradition or, as is the case of the fourth Eucharistic Prayer, are inspired by Eastern models. 
 Each one of the Eastern Churches will have a different emphasis of the mystery. For example, most Churches following the Byzantine tradition lay great emphasis on the action of the Holy Spirit in the Eucharist. This theme is barely touched upon in the Roman liturgy although it has been made more explicit in the new Eucharistic Prayers. 
 One example is the epiclesis, or invocation of the Holy Spirit, that is prayed after the consecration in the Ukrainian Catholic Church: 
 "Priest (silently): Again we offer to You this spiritual and un-bloody sacrifice, and we implore and pray, and entreat You, send down Your Holy Spirit upon us and upon these gifts here present. 
 (Blessing the bread) And make this bread the precious body of Your Christ. (Blessing the chalice) And that which is in this chalice, the precious blood of your Christ. (Blessing both) Having changed them by Your Holy Spirit: 
 "Priest (silently): So that to those who partake of them, they may be for the purification of the soul, for the remission of sins, for the communion in Your Holy Spirit, for the fullness of the heavenly kingdom, for confidence in You, not for judgment or condemnation. 
 "Priest (silently): Moreover, we offer to You this spiritual sacrifice for those who departed in the faith; the forefathers, fathers, patriarchs, prophets, apostles, preachers, evangelists, martyrs, confessors, ascetics and for every righteous spirit who has died in the faith." 
 The examples of differences in theological emphasis could be multiplied many times. 
 What is important to remember is that, far from being a source of division, these differences serve to show the unfathomable depth of the Eucharistic mystery. It is such an ineffable gift that no individual or community has been able to express it in its entirety. 
 This is one reason why the Church seeks to conserve and promote all of her various liturgical traditions. The whole Church would be the poorer if one of them were to be lost. 
 * * * 
 Follow-up: Theology of Latin- and Eastern-Rite Liturgies [11-27-2012] 
 In the wake of our comments on the different theological stresses in the liturgies of East and West (see Nov. 13), a reader commented: "I appreciated your response regarding the different emphases in theology in Latin- and Eastern-rite liturgies. As a (Latin-rite) teen I also found a Byzantine-rite church a few blocks from home, and loved how I could go to either rite, and became familiar with both. Your quote of an Eastern epiclesis included 'and upon us,' and perhaps that was the basis of the new Eucharistic Prayers having a 'dual epiclesis' before and after the institution. But I think, in a subtle way, that is also in the Roman Canon, expressed in gesture: Before the consecration the priest makes the sign of the cross over the bread and wine, and after, at the words 'ut quotquot ex hac altaris participatione … omni benedictione et gratia repleantur,' he (and everyone if they wish) make the sign of the cross on themselves. The invocation of the Spirit is implied, though not expressed in the words. It would again show a difference in emphasis and expression, not in substance. Do you think my theory has any validity?" 
 It was commonly alleged among Latin-rite theologians that although the Roman Canon had no explicit invocation of the Holy Spirit, it had in fact not one but two epicleses, before and after the consecration. 
 This was among the reasons why the Holy See stipulated to the commissions composing the new Eucharistic Prayers that they should all have two epicleses, or invocations of the Holy Spirit. One asks for the consecration and the second for communion and unity among the faithful as a fruit of the celebration. 
 In the Roman Canon the epiclesis was adduced more from the text than from the gestures made by the priest, since these gestures had suffered several modifications over the centuries. 
 Thus the first epiclesis would be the "Quam oblationem": "Be pleased, O God we pray, to bless, acknowledge, and approve this offering in every respect; make it spiritual and acceptable, so that it may become for us the Body and Blood of your most beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ." These words are now accompanied by the gesture of invoking the Holy Spirit by the priest's extending both hands over the gifts. In the extraordinary form, however, the gestures at this moment are five signs of the cross. 
 The second epiclesis in the Roman Canon would be, as our reader posits, the prayer "Supplices te rogamus": "In humble prayer we ask you, almighty God: command that these gifts be borne by the hands of your holy Angel to your altar on high in the sight of divine majesty, so that all of us, who through this participation at the altar receive the most holy Body and Blood of your Son, may be filled with every grace and heavenly blessing." 
 Once more it is the petition that of blessing from on high, rather than the priest's gesture, that would constitute the epiclesis. 
 ZENIT International News Agency Via della Stazione di Ottavia, 95 00165 Rome, Italy www.zenit.org 
 To subscribe http://www.zenit.org/english/subscribe.html or email: english-request@zenit.org with SUBSCRIBE in the "subject" field 
 Provided Courtesy of: Eternal Word Television Network 5817 Old Leeds Road Irondale, AL 35210 www.ewtn.com 
 HOME - EWTNews - FAITH - TELEVISION - RADIO - LIBRARY - MULTIMEDIA WHAT'S NEW - GENERAL - RELIGIOUS CATALOGUE - PILGRIMAGES - ESPAÑOL 

 id="file23242826" filename="Theology_of_religions" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theology_of_religions">
 Theology of religions 
 The theology of religions is the branch of theology (mostly represented by Christian, Hindu, Islamic and Jewish theology[1]) and religious studies that attempts to theologically evaluate the phenomena of religions. Three important schools within Christian theology of religions are pluralism, inclusivism, and exclusivism, which describe the relation of other religious traditions to Christianity and attempt to answer questions about the nature of God and salvation. 
 The American theologian Langdon Brown Gilkey argued that the political situation of the West following World War II left a need for Christian thinkers to reconsider the place of other religions specifically because of the changing political world: 
 Colonies vanished, Europe disappeared as a major power, other non-western power centers appeared representing other ways of life and other religions. The West no longer ruled the world... Western religion became one among the other world religions.[2] 
 The most common model of the views that Christians take of other religions is a simple three-point model first articulated by Alan Race.[3] 
 Pluralism is the belief that multiple religions are true and equally valid in their communication of the truth about God, the world, and salvation. The chief expounder of this view is John Hick of Claremont Graduate School in California, who first propounded it in his book God and the Universe of Faiths (1973).[4] It has been notably criticized in the declaration Dominus Iesus by Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger. 
 To a pluralist such as Hick, Christianity is not the absolute, unique, and final way to God, but one among several. While pluralists assert the validity of all religions, they also deny the finality of all religions. Hick challenges the older view that Christ or Christianity must be seen at the center of religions and argues instead that God must be seen at the center of religions, a view also called theo-centrism. The pluralistic contention is that although religions have different outward forms, all have the same source in the same god.[5] 
 To an evangelical Christian, such pluralism only means the abolition of kerygmatic mission (i.e., the mission of evangelizing the world with the salvific gospel of Jesus Christ). Pluralism has been criticized as an invasive force that masquerades as Christianity while imperialistically demanding the surrender of Christian distinctiveness.[6] Pluralists respond that Christian pluralism is not an invasive force at all, but actually arises from tensions within the Christian tradition, through a process of auto-deconstruction.[7] Some have pointed out similarities between Hick's theo-centrism and Hindu pluralism as propounded in the Bhagavad Gita: 
 By whatsoever way men worship Me, even so do I accept them; for, in all ways, O Partha, men walk in My path" (IV.11)[8] 
 Another common evangelical criticism of pluralism is that the religions of the world are fundamentally and irreconcilably different, and that to value them equally requires a devaluation of propositional truth claims. It is for this reason that pluralism is often treated as a form of self-defeating relativism, though pluralists generally do not accept this label. According to John Hick, "Religious pluralism is emphatically not a form of relativism." Hick considers himself a critical realist.[9] 
 Inclusivism is the belief that God is present in non-Christian religions to save adherents through Christ. The inclusivist view has given rise to the concept of the "anonymous Christian", an adherent of a non-Christian religion whom the Christian God nevertheless saves through Christ. This position was popularized by the Roman Catholic theologian, Karl Rahner (b. 1904-d.1984).[10] 
 Christian inclusivism is based on two axioms: the first is that salvation is through Christ alone, the second is that God wills the whole world to be saved.[11] Consequently, argue inclusivists, God saves people through Christ alone; however, he makes this possible through ways that extend to all humanity. 
 To Rahner, a non-Christian religion is a lawful religion for until its followers have a Christian witness it is a means by which non-Christians gain a right relationship with God. Also, the religion is included in God’s plan of salvation which God has ordained for the communication of His grace. 
 Inclusivism has a great appeal to people because of its sympathetic approach to religion. 
 Exclusivism is the theological position that holds that there is no salvation in non-Christian religions. Notable among the exclusivists of the twentieth century are Samuel Zwemer, Hendrik Kraemer, and Lesslie Newbigin.[12] 
 Citing the Aristotelian concept of truth as one and not many, exclusivists regard all religious claims other than Christianity as false and invalid. [13] Exclusivists hold that salvation is through Christ alone, and that non-Christians cannot be saved because they neither recognize Christ's uniqueness nor lordship. 
 Extremist exclusivism perceives all non-Christian religions as demonic and enemies of Christian truth.[14] Moderate exclusivism sees some non-Christian religions as containing elements whereby a dialogue with them can be initiated.[15] 
 Exclusivists argue that all claims to truth, including those made by pluralists and inclusivists, must exclude alternative claims. However, some exclusivists acknowledge that the Bible also speaks of the Chistian God as involved in the history of the nations. Thus, though being very vociferous in his attacks on Hinduism, Nehemiah Goreh could say that ‘Most erroneous as is the teaching of such books as the Bhagvadgita, the Bhagvata, etc., yet they teach something of ananyabhakti (undivided devotedness to God), of vairagya (giving up the world), of namrata (humility), of ksama (forbearance), etc., which enables one to appreciate the precepts of Christianity.’[16] 
 Hendrik Kraemer's exclusivism is based on a skepticism towards claims of similarity between religions: "Every religion is an individisble, and not to be divided". Religion "is not a series of tenets, institutions, practices that can be taken one by one as independent items of religious life".[17] 
 A significant expansion of the three-point model was proposed by Paul F. Knitter in his 2002 book Introducing Theologies of Religions. He outlined four possible views or models that one could adopt.[18] 
 Knitter's "replacement model" corresponds to Exclusivism in the three-point model, but is split into two subsections: Total Replacement and Partial Replacement. The Total Replacement model is most frequently found in Fundamentalist/Evangelical churches, and largely represents the work of Karl Barth. It suggests that the reason the Christian religion is considered true is that it realizes that all religion is false (including itself), and recognizes that the only true belief can be found in Jesus. It does not necessarily say that there is nothing of value in other religions, but simply that there is no use in studying other religions, as everything of value can be found in Christ. The Partial Replacement model has similar things to say about other religions, but does not go so far as to say that there is nothing of value in other religions. It suggests that other religions might have access to God's revelation, but not to God's salvation. This is an important distinction, as it implies that some truth can be found in other religions, but not whole of the truth, and not enough to receive salvation. This view is largely based on the views expressed by the World Council of Churches in their discussion on religious dialogue and theology. 
 Knitter's main contribution, informed by his Christian faith and the idea that Christianity is a fulfillment of Judaism, implies that, while the previous religion was not wrong, it was incomplete and awaiting later fulfillment. This view is also held by some forms of Islam with respect to Christianity and Judaism before them, as well as by Mormonism and all other faiths who feel they have a later clarification from God. 
 However, one's religion does not have to be founded after others in order to see one's religion as a fulfillment. For instance, some Christian theologians argue that if their faith *arrives* later than the indigenous religion, even if in history Christianity came first, such indigenous systems were "God's placeholder," often with common truths learned from nature mixed with erroneous revelatory truths, that can be fulfilled and corrected with the revealed truth of the Christian Scriptures. 
 Proponents of this view include Karl Rahner, whose appreciation of the phrase "all grace is Christ's grace" led him to the controversial theory of "anonymous Christians" - those who are already saved by the light they have, yet have not yet heard the gospel.[19] 
 This model admits that an admixture of truth, error, and incompleteness of revelation exists in all religions, and we need one another to understand and find the truth. While this is a type of pluralism, it does not go so far as to admit that everyone is right, or that there is no objective truth - it only admits that we must learn from one another to find it. It may be that one or another faith is wrong on even major doctrines - but it is also right and has some value in contributing to the whole. 
 This is Knitter's analog of pure pluralism. All paths may lead to God, and no one can affirm surely that their way is correct. We must all learn from one another, and pull back from making any absolute claims about spiritual matters. The acceptance model takes a subjective approach that admits that various viewpoints may work or not work for any given individual, and that is the measure of truth, and any claims beyond that are speculation. 
 ^ Gilkey, "Plurality and Its Theological Implications", in The Myth of Christian Uniqueness: Toward a Pluralistic Theology of Religions (edited by John Hick), p. 40 
 ^ Race, Alan (1982). Christians and Religious Pluralism: Patterns in the Christian Theology of Religions. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books. 
 ^ Domenic Marbaniang (2007), Theology of Religion: Pluralism, Inclusivism, and Exclusivism, ACTS Academy paper, Bangalore. 
 ^ Domenic Marbaniang (2007), Theology of Religion: Pluralism, Inclusivism, and Exclusivism, ACTS Academy paper, Bangalore. 
 ^ Alister E. McGrath, "Conclusion," in Four Views on Salvation in a Pluralistic World, ed. Stanley N. Gundry, Dennis L. Okholm, and Timothy R. Phillips (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1996), 205-7. 
 ^ Christopher Carroll Smith, "In Defense of a Christian Pluralism," Journal for the Renewal of Religion and Theology 5 (2009), available from http://renewtheology.org/paperCSmith0709. 
 ^ Domenic Marbaniang, Theology of Religion: Pluralism, Inclusivism, and Exclusivism, as cited by Imtitoshi Longkumer in "Issues in Mission and Evangelism in a Pluralistic Context: A New Paradigm Inquiry," NCC Review, Vol. CXXXVII, No.01, Jan-Feb 2017 (Nagpur: National Council of Churches in India, 2017), p.10 
 ^ Domenic Marbaniang (2007), Theology of Religion: Pluralism, Inclusivism, and Exclusivism, ACTS Academy paper, Bangalore. 
 ^ Domenic Marbaniang (2007), Theology of Religion: Pluralism, Inclusivism, and Exclusivism, ACTS Academy paper, Bangalore. 
 ^ Ken Gnanakan, The Pluralistic Predicament (Bangalore: TBT, 1992), p. 23 
 ^ Emil Brunner & Karl Barth, Natural Theology (London: Geoffrey Bles: The Centenary Press, 1946), pp. 74, 128 
 ^ Domenic Marbaniang (2007), Theology of Religion: Pluralism, Inclusivism, and Exclusivism, ACTS Academy paper, Bangalore. 
 ^ Quote from Proofs of the Divinity of Our Lord, as cited by R.H.S. Boyd in Indian Christian Theology (Delhi: ISPCK, 1969), p. 55 
 ^ Introducing Theologies of Religions. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 2002. 256 pp. ISBN 1-57075-419-5 
 ^ Knitter, 72, 73. See also, Karl Rahner, “Christianity and the non-Christian Religions,  in Theological Investigations (Baltimore: Helicon Press, 1966) 5:115-134 
 Ames, Edward Scribner. The Psychology of Religious Experience, New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1910. 
 Baillie, John. Our Knowledge of God, London: Oxford University Press, 1952. 
 Bambrough, Renford. Reason, Truth and God, London: Methuen & Co. Ltd., 1969. 
 Boyd, Robin. Indian Christian Theology, Delhi: ISPCK, 1975, rev. edn. 
 Gnanakan, Ken. The Pluralistic Predicament, Bangalore: TBT, 1992. 
 Kant, Immanuel. Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone, tr. Theodore M. Greene & New York: Basic Books, Inc. Publishers, 1963. 
 Otto, Rudolf. Mysticism East and West, trs. Bertha L. Bercey & Richena C. Payne, New York: The Macmillan Company, 1960. 
 Singh, Narendra. A Christian Theology of Religions, Bangalore: SAIACS Press, 2005. 
 Sumithra, Sunand. Christian Theologies from an Indian Perspective, Bangalore: Theological Book Trust, 1990. 
 Tan, Loe-Joo. "The Catholic Theology of Religions: A Survey of Pre-Vatican II and Conciliar Attitudes Towards Other Religions." Scottish Journal of Theology 67, no. 03 (2014): 285-303. 

 id="file23242730" filename="the-rite-of-blessing-and-sprinkling-of.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://gioakimminhtam.blogspot.com/2014/04/the-rite-of-blessing-and-sprinkling-of.html">
 Search This Blog 
 THE RITE OF BLESSING AND SPRINKLING OF HOLY WATER 
 Here I offer a reflection on the Rite of Blessing and Sprinkling Holy Water after I read the article “The Rite of Blessing and Sprinkling of Holy Water  written by Yayne Newton Ahearn, known more familiarly as the Sprinkling Rite, or formerly the “Asperges  is in the Introductory Rites of the Order of the Mass, following the Sign of Cross and greeting, otherwise it is much less frequently used than the Penitential Rite, except the feast of All Saints, Christmas and Easter.[1] 
 The blessing and sprinkling of holy water has evolved this way because of its connections with Baptism, the renewal of baptismal promises, and the custom of performing purification rites prior to prayer. Although the ritual may take place on any Sunday, it is especially fitting during the Easter season.[2] 
 1. Historical Perspectives 
 The Rite rose from a sign of sanctification in monastic ritual in the eight century in parallel with the Miserere, developed in the East for purification and sanctification. But the rite eventually took on a baptismal character. In this period of time, it was never considered to be the part of the Order of Mass.[3] 
 In the Middle Ages, the liturgical movements developed to react with the theology of those frighten times which emphasized suffering and evil. Due to these developments, the rite is included in the introductory rites of the Oder of Mass for cleansing the soul in preparation for celebration of the Eucharist. 
 In the sixteenth century, the rite was practiced in the concluding blessing of the Mass as a sign of sanctification. 
 In due time of the Vatican II, the liturgical reform established the Aspereges, now called the Rite of Blessing and Sprinkling Holy Water, as an element within the liturgy insisting on the baptism, not only bringing forgiveness of sin but also giving people an identity and calling to mission.[4] 
 2. Pastoral Applications 
 According to the rubrics, the priest stands at chair and a container of water is brought to him. But there is a problem when this rite is connected to baptism with the holy water. 
 The text for the introduction and the blessing prayer bear the caveat in these or similar words. The introduction explains the meaning of the rite and is an invitation to pray. There are three blessing prayers, the first two of them for use at any time, the other for the Easter season. These texts invite active participation of the community in the blessing by sung the acclamation. [5] 
 For this rite to speak, everyone has got too get wet. Therefore, those who prepare the liturgy have to map out the route in order that the presider is able to move about the entire worship space and not just make a brief pass through the main aisle.[6] 
 The font containing the blessed water at the Easter Vigil is in a central location along with the Paschal Candle and the Cross. The liturgy begins with the presider going to the font, greeting and inviting people into the thanksgiving over blessed water. A song is sung during the sprinkling. There are many options here. The Roman Missal (Sacramentary) suggests the traditional two texts (Asperges me and Vidi aquam), as well as Ezekiel 36:25-26, one based on 1 Peter 1:3-5, 1 Peter 2:9, and a nonbiblical text that sings of the streams of water flowing from the wounded side of Jesus. The third edition of the Roman Missal repeats all of these options and adds one based on Wisdom 3:8 and Ezekiel 36:26, as well as one based on Daniel 3:77 and 79. As people feel the holy water, they make the Sign of Cross. 
 REFERENCES 
 Russell Hardiman, 1997, The Years of The Year, Pastoral Liturgy Publications, College of Theology, University of Notre Dame Australia. 
 Cheslyn Jones, Geoffrey Wainwright, Paul Bradshaw and Edward Yarnold SJ (ed), 1992, The Study of Liturgy, Oxford University Press, London. 
 Rita Thiron, 2004, Preparing Parish Liturgies, A Guide to Resources, Liturgical Press, Collegeville, Minnesota. 
 [1] Russell Hardiman (ed.), 1997, The Years of The Year, Pastoral Liturgy Publications, College of Theology, University of Notre Dame Australia, 163. 
 [2] Missale Romanum, third edition, appendix II:1. 
 [3] Russell Hardiman (ed.), 1997, The Years of The Year, 163. 
 [4] Russell Hardiman (ed.), 1997, The Years of The Year, 163. 
 [5] Russell Hardiman (ed.), 1997, The Years of The Year, 164 
 [6] Russell Hardiman (ed.), 1997, The Years of The Year, 164. 

 id="file23242791" filename="the-theology-of-dune.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.thescottsmithblog.com/2018/02/the-theology-of-dune.html">
 Check out our sponsors 
 The Theology of Dune 
 Ever noticed all the Christian symbolism in Frank Herbert's Dune Series? The Orange-Catholic Bible is a clue that much more lies beneath the dune-covered surface of this science-fiction masterpiece. From the Messiah-figure of the Kwisatz Haderach to the Flight into the Desert of Arrakis, there is quite a bit of Christian symbolism in Frank Herbert's epic Dune series. 
 Rather listen than read? Here's our podcast episode covering all this material: 
 Interested in the Theology of Dune? How about the Theology of all the Sci-Fi in the Galaxy? I have written the following book to cover exactly that. The Theology of Sci-Fi covers Star Wars, Dune, Asimov's Foundation Series, The Matrix, Superman, and the classics of science of fiction: 
 Dune is one the great classics of science-fiction. It inspired, among others, George Lucas who conceived of another desert planet, Tatooine, and the Messianic-figures who would arise from it. 
 Here are the Christian symbols and connections that I have noticed reading and re-reading Dune Series. Please comment below and share you own insights into the Christian themes, motifs, and symbols hidden within Dune: 
 Paul Atreides, the Kwisatz Haderach, or Muad'Dib (Fremen) - The Messiah or Christ Figure 
 The Kwisatz Haderach is the Messianic figure of the Dune universe who will lead the people to "true freedom" and the Promised Land. The desert Messiah is known as the Kwisatz Haderach to the Bene Gessarit. 
 Paul is also known as Muad'Dib to the Fremen: 
 The name Muad'Dib comes from the name of a kangaroo mouse, a small rodent that lives on the planet Arrakis ... which the internet has fallen in love with. 
 A shadow resembling the Muad'Dib mouse is visible on Arrakis' second moon, as well as on a constellation. Paul Atreides takes the name Muad'Dib when he becomes a member of Stilgar's Fremen tribe. 
 The term Kwisatz Haderach is also likely derived from the Hebrew-Kabbalistic term, Kefitzat Ha'derech. In Hebrew, Kefitzat Ha'derech, literally "the Leap of the Way," describes the way an initiate may travel some distance instantaneously, even appearing to be in two or more places at once.[1] This is basically describing teleportation or, in Catholic terms, bi-location, a hallmark of living saints. When explaining the term "Muad'Dib" to Duke Leto, Thufir Hawat actually describes the Muad'Dib as following the Messianic pattern. 
 Like Christ, Paul Atreides is also the son of a king (or a Duke). Also, like Christ, Paul Atreides must go undergo a series of trials or temptations, mostly in the desert. 
 Paul Atreides is first tested by Reverend Mother Gaius Mohiam with the Gom Jabbar, a meta-cyanide poisoned needle. This also foreshadows his drinking of the poisonous Water of Life. 
 Paul Muad'Dib is then tested by the Water of Life after being received into the ranks of the Fremen. Paul takes this ordeal upon himself, knowing it is his Messianic destiny to do so. 
 After surviving the ordeal of drinking the Water of Life, Paul Muad'Dib fulfills the Fremen's prophesies concerning the Messiah, including ... 
 "The sleeper has awakened": The Water of Life is a Messianic fulfillment, the passage through death and new life. More on the Water of Life at the end of this article. 
 To fulfill another prophesy, Paul must go into the desert and conquer Shai-Hulud, the great sandworm. In this sense, the Sandworm is like satan, the serpent, which Christ must overcome through a series of temptations - or trials as it is for Paul Atreides. 
 The Fremen viewed the great sandworms as physical embodiments of the One God of their original Zensunni religion, rather than a satanic figure. As will be discussed below, this is not necessarily a contradiction, as Judaism and Christianity both exposed many pagan religions as worshiping demons instead of the one, true God. 
 Frank Herbert wrote a 1977 essay "Sandworms of Dune" describing the function of sandworms in his story.[2] Sandworms, Herbert said, provide the danger and mystery of terra incognita. Paul Atreides must confront this terror to transform and then overcome his enemies. Great power and knowledge must come at a great price. This is why Paul must risk being devoured by the sandworm Shai-Hulud and the madness of the consuming the Water of Life, the extract of the sandworm. 
 Lady Jessica first notices the Muad'Dib among the constellations in the desert manual following their escape from Baron's men. The Muad'Dib is the desert mouse, and the tail of its constellation points north. Similarly, the Messiah had its own star among the Hebrews. You can read more about the constellation Leo and the Lion of Judah here. 
 The Sandworms, Shai-Hulud - Dragons, Satan 
 The Sandworms were the massive, native life-forms of the planet Arrakis. The Sandworms inhabited and were able to travel within and beneath the vast deserts of Dune. The Sandworms were also the source of the Spice Melange. 
 As described above, the Fremen viewed the Sandworms as the physical embodiments of the One God of their original Zensunni religion. The Fremen called the Sandworm by various names, notably "The Maker" and Shai-Hulud, which could be translated as "Old Man of the Desert", "Old Father Eternity", or "Grandfather of the Desert". 
 Frank Herbert describes the sandworms of Dune as inspired by the "archetypal black beast," who lives underground in a cavern and hoards treasure.[3] Herbert listed examples like the dragon in Beowulf and the dragon of Colchis which guarded the Golden Fleece from Jason and the Argonauts. 
 Like these dragons, the Sandworms of Arrakis "guard" the melange deposits. In the novels, the Sandworms are occasionally referred to as "dragons of the desert".[4] 
 Frank Herbert wrote a 1977 essay "Sandworms of Dune" describing the function of sandworms in his story.[2] Sandworms, Herbert said, provide the danger and mystery of terra incognita. Paul Atreides must confront this terror to transform and then overcome his enemies. Great power and knowledge must come at a great price. This is why Paul must risk being devoured by the sandworm Shai-Hulud and the madness of the consuming the Water of Life, the extract of the sandworm. 
 Frank Herbert provided the following description of the archetypal nature of the Sandworms: 
 The elements of any mythology must grow from something profoundly moving, something which threatens to overwhelm any consciousness which tries to confront the primal mystery. Yet, after the primal confrontation, the roots of this threat must appear as familiar and necessary as your own flesh. For this, I give you the sandworms of Dune. [...] the extension of human lifespan cannot be an unmitigated blessing. Every such acquisition requires a new consciousness. And a new consciousness assumes that you will confront dangerous unknowns — you will go into the deeps. 
 Like the dragons depicted in the Bible, Herbert's sandworm-dragons are supposed to be confronted and subjugated, like satan and sin. They are to be slain, as Adam and Eve failed to do. 
 Duke Leto as St. Joseph, the foster-father of the Messiah 
 Duke Leto is Saint Joseph, who takes his family into the desert of Egypt, or in this case the planet "Dune" or Arakkis. However, Duke Leto taking his family to Arakkis is more like taking them into King Herod's camp. 
 Coincidentally, remember which actor played St. Joseph in the Nativity Story? 
 That's right! Oscar Isaac, who also portrays Duke Leto in Denis Villeneuve's 2021 Dune: 
 Lady Jessica as the Virgin Mary 
 Mary descends from the line of King David. Similarly, there is a matriarchal line of Bene Gessarit in Dune. Speaking of the Bene Gessarit, the title "Bene Gesserit" resembles an epithet of the Jewish people, Bene Jeshurun (בְּנֵי יְשֻׁרוּן), especially as "Gesserit" is pronounced with a soft "G". "Bene Jeshurun" means, roughly "Sons of The Just", with יְשֻׁרוּן also taken to be a synonym for Israel. 
 The Bene Gesserit were long prophesied to (and had been working for hundreds of generations) to bring forth the Kwisatz Haderach Messiah. Likewise, Lady Jessica is prophesied to be, as Stilgar says, "the Bene Gessarit of legend whose son will lead us to paradise." 
 The prophesy of an immaculate virgin who would give birth to the Messiah is the oldest prophesy in Christianity. See the following on Genesis 3:15, called the proto-evangelium or "first Gospel." For hundreds of generations, the people of Israel were awaiting the Virgin who would give birth to the Messiah, the Messiah who would "crush the serpent's head". Perhaps most interesting, Muslims call the Blessed Mother the Sayyida, or Lady, while the Fremen appoint Lady Jessica as a Sayyadina. The term Sayyadina means "friend of God" in the Dune language of Chakobsa and was used by the Fremen to describe their priestesses who would drink the Water of Life and become Reverend Mothers. 
 The Quran describes all the major points in the life of the Virgin Mary - the Annunciation, the Visitation, and the Nativity. Angels are depicted as addressing the Blessed Mother and saying: 
 O Mary, God has chosen you, and purified you; He has chosen you above all the women of creation. (Quran 3:42) 
 Above all the women of the earth! This is similar to Elizabeth’s address of Mary, “blessed are you among women and blessed is the fruit of your womb  (Luke 1). To the Muslims, the Blessed Mother is the true Sayyida, or Lady. The only serious rivals to Mary would be Mohammed’s daughter, Fatima, and his wife, both of whom are numbered along with Mary as the four greatest women in Islamic history. Nevertheless, after the death of Fatima, Mohammed wrote, “Thou shalt be the most blessed of all the women in Paradise, after Mary." Fatima, herself, is even known to have said, "I surpass all women, except Mary." 
 Fremen as the Jews or Israelites or Hebrews 
 The Hebrew people were abused and colonized by the Romans, or the Harkonnen in Dune. The Messiah leads the Jews to freedom. Just as Moses freed the Israelites, Jesus Christ makes the Jews "free-men" or "Fremen". The Fremen are also like the Hebrew slaves in Egypt. Both are suffering under the yoke of Pharoah's or the Harkonnens' tyranny. Both are awaiting a Moses-like figure to "free" them, leading an Exodus into the Promised Land. Stilgar describes Paul Muad'Dib as the Prophet they call the Mahdi, whom they believe is "The One Who Will Lead Us to Paradise". Moses, himself, prophesied about the coming Messiah at Deuteronomy 18:15, saying "The Lord your God will raise up for you a prophet like unto me from among you, from your brethren—him you shall heed." Similarly, in the 1984 Dune movie, Dr. Kynes remarks on Paul Atreides' adroitness with a stillsuit, reciting the prophesy: "He shall know your ways as if born to them." 
 The military aspect of the Fremen is especially interesting. Many of the Jews expected a military conqueror for their Messiah. The Messiah was prophesied to be the Lion of Judah, who would overthrow the power of the Romans. Surprisingly, the Lion of Judah came as the Lamb of God. 
 Missionaria Protectiva 
 The Missionaria Protectiva is depicting a dark version of religious evangelization and missionary work. The Missionaria Protectiva was called the "black arm of superstition" for Bene Gesserit Sisterhood. The Missionaria Protectiva sowed the seeds of superstition in primitive cultures throughout the known universe. Later, once the seeds sprouted into full-fledged legends, the Sisterhood would use this to their advantage. Despite such an ill intent, the legends proved to be true. 
 The Missionaria Protectiva is like the Christian Missionaries through history, especially during the Age of Discovery. The Missionaria Protectiva could also be compared to the diaspora of the Hebrew people which made for the easy spread of Christianity. 
 Perhaps Herbert is using the Missionaria Protectiva to provide cynical commentary on Christian evangelization and Muslim subjugation of primitive peoples. 
 The Baron Harkonnen as King Herod or Pharoah 
 The Baron Harkonnen is a King Herod figure. He is also a Pharaoh figure, given the desert background. Both figures attempted to abort the power of their rivals by killing the child who would be king. King Herod did this through the Slaughter of the Innocents at Bethlehem and elsewhere. As mentioned above, the Fremen are like the Hebrew slaves in Egypt. Both are suffering under the yoke of Pharoah's or the Harkonnens' tyranny. Like Herod's Slaughter of the Innocents, pharaoh also instructed the midwives to kill the Hebrew children. 
 The Orange-Catholic Bible 
 The mention of a Bible speaks for itself. It appears that much of the Bible as we know it has survived into the future in the Dune universe. The mention of this Bible may even be Herbert's way of connecting our universe to that of Dune. The color "orange" is especially interesting. In this context, orange typically represents the Protestant Irish. This may speak to an ancient reunion of Protestant and Catholic in the Dune universe. 
 The Water of Life 
 We read the following from St. Paul's Letter to the Ephesians: 
 Awake, O sleeper, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give you light. (Eph 5:14) 
 Sound familiar? Paul screams out to the ghost of his father, "the sleeper has awakened!" He does this after drinking from the Water of Life. Why? Because like Christ, he has passed through death to awake on the other side. The Water of Life is a Sacrament in the Dune universe. In particular, the Water of Life corresponds to either Baptism or the Tree of Life. In Dune, the Water of Life was a poisonous blue liquid which came from the bile of an immature sandworm. It was used by the Bene Gesserit to transform their Sisters into Reverend Mothers. If one was untrained in prana/bindu body control, the substance was lethal. The smallest amount of the Water of Life would kill someone or cause incredible agony. 
 The connection to Baptism is in the name of Water of Life, itself. In the waters of Baptism, we pass through death to new life. We become Christians, which literally means anointed (with water), and we become new creations. Drinking the Water of Life is like dying. In fact, before Paul Atreides, any man who drank the Water of Life did die. The Water of Life is also like another sacrament, the Eucharist. Typologically, the Eucharist is the new fruit of the Tree of Life. The phrasing of the Water of Life corresponds to the Tree of Life. What's more, if one eats or drinks the Eucharist unworthily, according to 1 Corinthians 11:27, drinks "death upon himself." Drinking the Water of Life is how one determines she is worthy of becoming a Sayyadina or Reverend Mother. 
 Quotes from the Saints appear within Dune 
 Lady Jessica at p. 85: "What is it Saint Augustine said? she asked herself. 'The mind commands the body and it obeys. The mind orders itself and meets resistance.' Yes--I am meeting more resistance lately. I could use a quiet retreat by myself." 
 Dune and Christianity Footnotes 
 [1] Weingrad, Michael, "Jews of Dune," Jewish Review of Books: March 29, 2015. [2] Herbert, Frank, "Sandworms of Dune", O'Reilly, Tim (ed.). The Maker of Dune: Thoughts of a Science Fiction Master. Berkley Books. [3] "Unpublished interview with Frank Herbert and Professor Willis E. McNelly," February 3, 1969. FH: And I made it, classically, the archetypal black beast, the one who lives underground in the cavern, with the gold. WM: I see. OK., right. Well, this is the dragon of Beowulf, who lives in the cave. FH: Yes. 
 [4] Herbert, Frank (1976), Children of Dune: "'My vision', he said. 'Unless we restore the dance of life here on Dune, the dragon on the floor of the desert will be no more.' Because he'd used the Old Fremen name for the great worm, she was a moment understanding him. Then: 'The worms?'" 
 Related Posts 
 Post a Comment 
 2 Comments 
 Gee twisting a scifi work written to expose the baselessness and fiction of human created religion gods & concocted messiah myths to then JUSTIFY the same religions as valid real is a joke laughable. I believe in blue fairies and will link all clipped selectively edited writings, comments & essays to make my belief justified. Go Blue Fairies the key to all being & life eternal. You blasphemer if you deny, wee. 
 You think Dune was written "to expose the baselessness and fiction of human created religion gods & concocted messiah myths"? That is, itself, a baseless belief, LOL. You've got too see at least a little irony in accusing me of your own fallacies, right? 
 What Dune ultimately shows us is that you cannot create a great hero story without reference to the true Messiah, the Hero of heroes, the Once and Future King of kings, Jesus Christ. Christ leaves an indelible mark on our imaginations. 
 Follow me on Socials! 
 Subscribe here 
 Check out my sponsors 
 MY NEW BOOK! 
 My eCourse: 
 About me 
 Hey, my name is Scott Smith. I'm a Catholic attorney, author, and theologian. I live in southern Louisiana with my beautiful wife and four wild-eyed children. We live between two rivers in our hometown of New Roads... Read more 

 id="file23242740" filename="Thurible" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thurible">
 Thurible 
 Metal censer suspended from chains, in which incense is burned during worship services 
 A single chain thurible, as used by some Western churches 
 Clockwise from upper left: Thurible, cup from inside thurible, incense boat, charcoal holder, and tongs (museum De Crypte, Gennep, Netherlands) 
 Beyond its ecclesiastical use, the thurible is also employed in various other spiritual or ceremonial traditions, including some Gnostic Churches, Freemasonry[2] (especially in the consecration of new lodges), and in Co-Freemasonry. Thuribles are sometimes employed in the practice of ceremonial magic.[3][4] 
 The workings of a thurible are quite simple. Each thurible consists of a censer section, chains (typically three or four, although single-chain thuribles also exist), a metal ring around the chains (used to lock the lid of the censer section in place), and usually (although not always) a removable metal crucible in which the burning charcoals are placed. Many thuribles are supplied with a stand, allowing the thurible to be hung safely when still hot, but not in use. Burning charcoal is placed inside the metal censer, either directly into the bowl section, or into a removable crucible if supplied, and incense (of which there are many different varieties) is placed upon the charcoal, where it melts to produce a sweet smelling smoke. This may be done several times during the service as the incense burns quite quickly. Once the incense has been placed on the charcoal the thurible is then closed and used for censing.[1] 
 Contents 
 The word thurible comes from the Old French thurible, which in turn is derived from the Latin term thuribulum. The Latin thuribulum is further formed from the root thus, meaning 'incense'. Thus is an alteration of the Ancient Greek word θύος (thuos), which is derived from θύειν (thuein) "to sacrifice".[1] 
 The Roman Missal, as revised in 1969, allows the use of incense at any Mass: in the entrance procession; at the beginning of Mass to incense the cross and the altar; at the Gospel procession and proclamation; after the bread and the chalice have been placed upon the altar, to incense the offerings, the cross, and the altar, as well as the priest and the people; at the elevation of the host and the chalice after the consecration.[5] 
 Three double swings: the Most Blessed Sacrament, a relic of the Holy Cross and images of the Lord exposed for public veneration, the offerings for the sacrifice of the Mass, the altar cross, the Book of the Gospels, the Paschal Candle, the priest, and the people. 
 Two double swings (and only at the beginning of the celebration, after the incensing of the altar): relics and images of the Saints exposed for public veneration. 
 A series of single swings: the altar. 
 The priest may incense the offerings for Mass by tracing a cross over them with the thurible instead of using three swings of the thurible,[6] 
 John Michael Quinn, Bishop of Winona-Rochester, swinging a thurible over the offering at Mass 
 The responsibilities of a thurifer include: 
 Holding the thurible open to enable the priest to put incense in it, after which he blesses it with the Sign of the Cross without using any formula of words. 
 Carrying the thurible in procession (gently swinging if needed to keep the charcoal burning). 
 Presenting the thurible to the priest or deacon when they need to use it. 
 Incensing (in the absence of a deacon) the priest after the priest has incensed the offering at Mass. 
 Another server, previously called a boat boy and now more commonly a boat bearer,[1] may carry a boat or container of incense with a small spoon to add grains as the thurible burns low. 
 These rules, except for the manner of incensing the offerings at Mass, applied also before 1969. Earlier editions of the Roman Missal prescribe that the offerings be incensed by forming over them with the thurible three crosses and then three circles, the first two anticlockwise and last clockwise, while also saying a prescribed prayer with the words matching the strokes.[7] They also direct that incensing the altar be done with single swings at 29 designated points of an altar attached to the rear wall of the sanctuary, and at 22 points of a freestanding altar.[1] 
 In the Ambrosian Rite, the thurible has no top cover, and is swung clockwise before censing a person or object.[9] 
 A thurible used in an Anglican church, cover open and hanging from a wooden holder. 
 Use of incense was abandoned in the Church of England by the turn of the 19th century[10] and was later thought to be illegal.[11][12] Today, the use of incense in an Anglican church is a fairly reliable guide to churchmanship, that is, how 'high' (more Catholic in liturgical style) or how 'low' (more Protestant) the individual church is.[13] Anglo-Catholic churches may use generous quantities of incense. In recent years, some middle-of-the-road Anglican churches have taken to using incense a few times a year for special occasions. The use of incense and chimes is colloquially called "Bells and Smell," by members of high church parishes, some as an inside joke, while others see it as a pejorative. [14] 
 The number of points within the liturgy at which an Anglican church may use incense varies. If incense is used at the entrance procession, a thurifer holding the smoking thurible leads the procession and on arrival at the altar the bishop or priest presiding censes it either immediately after the introit or during the Gloria in excelsis Deo, if this is sung.[15][16][17] Incense may also be used at the reading of the gospel: after the announcement of the gospel, the book is censed left, centre and right.[18] 
 If an Anglican church uses incense at only one point of the service, it does so at the offertory.[19] The gifts and the altar are first censed; then follows censing of the priest (three swings of the thurible), of the other clergy (single swing to the gospel side and another to the epistle side), the choir (single or triple swing to either side) and the congregation (a swing to the gospel side, another to the epistle side and another to the middle).[20][21] 
 Incense is also used at Solemn Evensong, which by definition is a sung celebration of vespers with use of incense.[22] 
 Incense is understood as symbolizing the sanctifying grace of the Holy Spirit and the prayers of the Saints rising to heaven. Incense is offered by the priest or deacon during the services. In some traditions, the ecclesiarch (sacristan) and his assistant (paraecclesiarch) will perform the censing at specific moments of the service. 
 The thurible (Greek: Θυμιατο, Thymiato; Church Slavonic: Кадилница, kadilnitsa) used is often gold plated (combining in itself at the offering of incense the three gifts of the Biblical Magi: gold, frankincense, and myrrh). The thurible consists of a metal bowl (usually with a base so it can stand upright) into which the charcoal and incense are placed, and a lid (often topped with a cross), pierced by holes to allow the fragrance from the incense to escape. The censer will usually have three outer chains (for the Holy Trinity) attached to the bowl, and a fourth inner chain (for the Oneness of God) attached to the lid. The three outer chains are gathered together and attached to a round conical plate attached to a ring; the inner chain passes through a hole in the conical plate and is attached to another ring to make it easier to lift the lid. In the Greek and some Russian practice twelve bells will be attached to the chains (their ringing symbolizes the teaching of the twelve Apostles).[1] Sometimes the bowl and lid of the thurible are decorated with crosses or icons in repousse, and may even be decorated with semi-precious stones. When not in use the thurible is usually hung from a hook in the sanctuary. 
 When censing, the priest or deacon holds the censer below the conical plate with only one hand (the right hand) allowing it to swing freely. He will make the Sign of the Cross with the censer by making two vertical swings and a third horizontal swing (the three swings together symbolizing the Holy Trinity). 
 When the temple (church building) is censed, the priest or deacon will move in a sunwise (clockwise) direction, moving to his right as he censes in order the Holy Table (altar), sanctuary, Iconostasis, walls of the temple, clergy and faithful. There are two types of censing: a Greater Censing (which encompasses the entire temple and all of the people therein), and a Lesser Censing (which, depending upon the liturgical context, consists of censing only a portion of the temple and the people). 
 During some censings, especially the Greater Censing, the clergyman who is performing the censing will often carry a candle in his left hand. During Bright Week (the week which begins on Easter Sunday) the priest and the deacon will carry special Paschal candles at every censing, even the Lesser Censing. While carrying the Paschal candles, the priest or deacon will greet the members of the congregation with the Paschal greeting while censing them. Simple tapers are carried while censing during funerals and memorial services. 
 During the Eastern Roman Empire (Byzantine Empire) the emperor used to be permitted to offer incense on the Feast of the Nativity (no doubt as a memorial of the gifts of the Magi), but was permitted to perform no other priestly function. 
 If no priest is available, incense may be offered by a reader or senior layman, but with a hand censer which has no chains on it, but rather a handle (it often has bells as well, suspended from the handle or around the rim). The hand censer is also used in some monasteries even when a priest is present for certain censings which are done by a monastic other than a vested priest or deacon. 
 During Holy Week it is customary in some places for even the priest and deacon to use the hand censer for all of the censings, as a sign of humility and mourning at the Passion of Christ. 
 The faithful will often burn incense, using a hand censer, in the home during Morning and Evening Prayers, and it is not unusual for the head of the household to bless the Holy Icons and all of the members of the household with a hand censer. 
 The boat boy or boat bearer is a junior altar server position found in Catholic and Anglican churches. The role of a boat boy is to assist the thurifer, the senior altar server who carries the thurible.[1] The boat bearer carries the boat, a small metal container, Latin navicula, which holds the supplies of incense. The boat has a small spoon inside which is used to transfer the grains of incense onto the red-hot charcoals in the thurible. Although at times the boat bearer transfers the incense himself, more usually he simply holds the boat open as the priest performs this task. 
 In "The Miller's Tale" of Geoffrey Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales, it is noted that Absolon, "Gooth with a sencer [Middle English spelling of censer] on the haliday, / Sensynge the wyves of the parisshe faste; / And many a lovely look on hem he caste" (lines 3340-3342).[23] 
 ^ Reference at Masonic Encyclopedia, by Albert G Mackey. 
 ^ Michno, Dennis G. (1998). "The Holy Eucharist-Concerning the Use of Incense at the Eucharist". A Priest's Handbook - The Ceremonies of the Church. Harrisburg, PA: Moorehouse Publishing. ISBN 0-8192-1768-9. 
 ^ The form of the thurible and the manner in which it is swung can be seen in this video 
 ^ Dearmer, Percy (1928). The Parson's Handbook (11th ed.). London: Mowbray. p. 29. 

 id="file23242533" filename="traditional-holy-water" parent_folder="corpus" url="http://www.traditionalcatholicpriest.com/2013/04/25/traditional-holy-water/">
 Traditional Holy Water 
 Today I was asked to bless water. It takes a lot longer and is more work, but I now only do the traditional blessing of water. Before I knew any better, I would just make the sign of the cross over the water and that was it. Later on when I got “The Roman Ritual  I was shocked by the complete blessing of water including exorcisms and adding exorcised salt to the holy water. Here is the Rite from “The Roman Ritual : 
 “V. Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
 R. Who made heaven and earth. 
 Exorcism of Salt 
 O salt, creature of God, I exorcise you by the living God, by the true God, by the holy God, by the God who ordered you to be poured into the water by Eliseo the Prophet so that its life-giving powers might be restored. I exorcise you so that you may become a means of salvation for believers, that you may bring health of soul and body to all who make use of you, arid that you may put to flight and drive away from the places where you are sprinkled every apparition, villainy, and turn of devilish deceit, and every unclean spirit, adjured by Him Who will come to judge the living and the dead and the world by fire. Amen. 
 Let us pray. 
 Almighty and everlasting God, we humbly implore Thee, in Thy immeasurable kindness and love, to bless + and sanctify + this salt which Thou did create and give over to the use of mankind, so that it may become a source of health for the minds and bodies of all who make use of it, and may rid whatever it touches or sprinkles of all uncleanness and protect it from every assault of evil spirits. Through our Lord, Jesus Christ, Thy Son, Who lives and reigns with Thee in the unity of the Holy Spirit, God, for ever and ever. R. Amen. 
 Exorcism of Water 
 O water, creature of God, I exorcise you in the name of God the Father almighty, and in the name of Jesus Christ His Son, our Lord, and in the power of the Holy Spirit. I exorcise you so that you may put to flight all the power of the Enemy, and be able to root out and supplant that Enemy with his apostate angels: through the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, Who will come to judge the living and the dead and the world by fire. Amen. 
 Let us pray. 
 O God, Who for the salvation of mankind has built Thy greatest mysteries on this substance, water, in Thy kindness hear our prayers and pour down the power of Thy blessing + into this element, made ready for many kinds of purifications. May this, Thy creature, become an agent of divine grace in the service of Thy mysteries, to drive away evil spirits and dispel sickness, so that every-thing in the homes and other buildings of the faithful that is sprinkled with this water may be rid of all uncleanness and freed from every harm. Let no breath of infection, no disease-bearing air, remain in these places. May the wiles of the lurking Enemy prove of no avail. Let whatever might menace the safety and peace of those who live here be put to flight by the sprinkling of this water, so that the healthfulness, obtained by calling upon Thy holy name, may be made secure against all attack. Through our Lord Jesus Christ, Thy Son, Who lives and reigns with Thee in the unity of the Holy Spirit, God, for ever and ever. 
 R. Amen. 
 As a novus ordo priest, I really was never taught that there was a blessing for holy water other than in the mass and was in the sacramentary. Now I know that there is a blessing in the novus ordo book of blessings. I had a book of blessings but only rarely used it. Here are the words for blessing holy water: 
 Blessed are you, Lord, Almighty God, who deigned to bless us in Christ, the living water of our salvation, and to reform us interiorly, grant that we who are fortified by the sprinking of or use of this water, the youth of the spirit being renewed by the power of the Holy Spirit, may walk always in newness of life. 
 And then you make a sign of the cross over the water. 
 This is the blessing in the celebration of mass: 
 ORDER OF BLESSING 
 Introductory Rites 
 The celebrant begins with these words: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. 
 All make the Sign of the Cross and reply: Amen. 
 The celebrant greets those present, using the following or other suitable words, taken mainly from Sacred Scripture: May God, who through water and the Holy Spirit has given us a new birth in Christ, be with you all. 
 All make the following or some other suitable reply: And with your spirit. 
 As circumstances suggest, the celebrant may prepare those present for the blessing in the following or similar words: The blessing of this water reminds us of Christ, the living water, and of the sacrament of Baptism, in which we were born of water and the Holy Spirit. Whenever, therefore, we are sprinkled with this holy water or use it in blessing ourselves upon entering the church or at home, we thank God for his priceless gift to us and we ask for his help to keep us faithful to the sacrament we have received in faith. 
 Reading of the Word of God 
 A reader, another person present or the celebrant reads a short text of sacred Scripture, such as the following: 
 Listen to the words of the Holy Gospel according to John: 7:37-39 
 Let anyone who is thirsty come to me. 
 On the last and greatest day of the feast, Jesus stood up and exclaimed, “Let anyone who thirsts come to me and drink. Whoever believes in me, as Scripture says: ‘Rivers of living water will flow from within him.'  
 He said this in reference to the Spirit that those who came to believe in him were to receive. There was, of course, no Spirit yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified. 
 The reader concludes: The Gospel of the Lord. 
 All respond: Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ. 
 Alternative Readings: 
 You will draw water joyfully from the springs of salvation. Isaiah 12:1-6 
 Oh, come to the water, all you who are thirsty. Isaiah 55:1-11 
 She will give him the water of wisdom to drink. Sirach 15:1-6 
 Jesus Christ came by water and blood. 1 John 5:1-6 
 The Lamb will lead them to the springs of living water. Revelation 7:13-17 
 The river of life, rising from the throne of God and of the Lamb. Revelation 22:1-5 
 You, too, are clean. John 13:3-15 
 Prayer of Blessing 
 After the reading, the celebrant says: Let us pray. 
 All pray briefly in silence; then, with hands outstretched, the celebrant says the prayer of blessing: 
 Blessed are you, Lord, all-powerful God, who in Christ, the living water of salvation, blessed and transformed us. Grant that when we are sprinkled with this water or make use of it, we will be refreshed inwardly by the power of the Holy Spirit and continue to walk in the new life we received at Baptism. 
 We ask this though Christ our Lord. R. Amen. 
 I do not see any sign of the cross over the water in the rubrics, but it may be there. 
 So thank God we have the Roman Ritual to help us. You do not need to exorcise the salt every time. I exorcise the salt and keep it so when I do the traditional blessing, it does not take so long. Exorcised salt is very powerful against the devil. You can sprinkle around your house, yard, work, and neighborhood. You can use it to cook with too. 
 Now many of you would like to have exorcized holy water and most parishes do not have it. So my suggestion is to print up the traditional blessing of holy water and then take it to a priest with exorcised salt. If you do not have exorcised salt, get that done one time and bring it with you when you go to get the traditional holy water blessing. 
 Always remember that priests are busy. The more traditional and orthodox the priest is, the busier he will be. So make it easy for him by planning ahead and bring all that is needed for him to bless your water in the old rite. 
 The evil devil is everywhere and he is so smart. He is so happy that there is not exorcism of the holy water or the addition of exorcised salt. He is freer to torment us and tempt us. We need all the help we can get. 
 With more and more satanism and witchcraft, we need help badly. Through God’s love, He has given us these protectors, these shields. The devil worked in the church to get rid of these rites. Thank God, they are starting to come back. 
 Some simple things to use in protection against the devil are: Holy water, the exorcised St. Benedict’s Medal, The scapular with the investiture, the miraculous medal and carrying the rosary. 
 We are fortunate to be traditional catholics and have these weapons. When you go into battle, can you imagine using a stick to fight against people with automatic weapons? That would be so foolish. Yet when we are in a constant spiritual battle, sometimes we go to battle with a toothpick. 
 Always staying in the state of grace, helps so much to avoid the assaults of the devil. Once in Italy a priest in mortal sin went with the exorcist. The devil told him out loud in front of everyone all of his sins. From then on he had great respect for the devil. We should fear offending God more than fearing the devil. Never forget that Mary is a great protector against the evil one and St. Michael. St. Joseph is called “Terror of the devil . 

 id="file23242801" filename="transition-rituals.aspx" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.beliefnet.com/wellness/health/health-support/grief-and-loss/2001/05/transition-rituals.aspx">
 Baha'i Belief about death Death is regarded as a 'messenger of joy' for the deceased. Baha'is believe the soul lives on after the body's death and embarks on a spiritual journey. 
 Funeral practices Baha'i dead must be buried within an hour's travel distance from the place of death. Baha'is do not embalm or cremate their dead. The dead body is washed and wrapped in a shroud. Baha'is are often buried wearing a Baha'i burial ring. The only ceremonial requirement of a funeral is the recitation of the Prayer for the Dead. 
 Mourning rituals There are no Baha'i mourning rituals. 
 Buddhism Belief about death Death of the physical body is certain, but only a part of an ongoing process of re-incarnation until one receives enlightenment. After death it is believed that the dead person goes through a transformation in which they discover death, and prepare for their rebirth (if there is one). 
 Funeral practices In early times and commonly today, Buddhists cremate the bodies of their dead. The first seven days after death are the most important for final and funereal prayer. 
 Mourning rituals Prayers are said weekly, during a 49-day funeral period. It is during this period that the prayers of the mourners are believed to help the deceased during the post-death transformation and awaken their spirit to the true nature of death. 
 Catholicism Belief about death Catholics see death as a passage from this life to the new, everlasting life promised by Christ. The soul of the deceased goes on to the afterlife, which includes Purgatory as well as Heaven and Hell. According to Catholic belief, the bodies of the dead will be resurrected at the end of time. 
 Funeral practices The Catholic funeral service is called the Mass of the Resurrection. During it, Jesus Christ's life is remembered and related to that of the deceased. Eulogies are not allowed during the funeral mass, but may be delivered at a wake or other non-religious ceremony. There is also a final graveside farewell, and additional traditions depending on the region. The Church encourages Catholics to be buried in Catholic cemeteries. In 1963, the Vatican lifted the ban on cremation for Catholics. However, the cremains must be interred, not scattered or kept at home. 
 Mourning rituals The community and the church support mourners through the funeral mass and through non-religious services like wakes. 
 Catholic Funeral Guidelines Eastern Orthodox Belief about death Orthodox Christians believe believe death is a necessary consequence of human life, due to original sin. Death is necessary to achieve everlasting life. 
 Funeral practices The Eastern Orthodox hold a special vigil over the dead called the parastasis or panikhida, as a time of contemplation on death. The funeral service includes hymns, chants, and bible readings. Burial is preferred but the Orthodox Church allows cremation if the law of the country requires it. 
 Mourning rituals Orthodox Christians pray special prayers for the departed asking God to have mercy on the souls of the dead. 
 Hinduism Belief about death Hindus believe death is part of the continuing cycle of birth, life, death, and rebirth. The soul of the dead transfers to another body after death. 
 Funeral practices Hindus generally cremate their dead. In preparation for cremation, the body is bathed, laid in a coffin, adorned with sandalwood paste and garlands, and wrapped in white cloth. In the cremation ceremony, the body is carried three times counterclockwise around the pyre, then placed upon it. The chief mourner hits the cremation switch. 
 Mourning rituals The days of mourning are considered a time of ritual impurity. Mourners cover all religious pictures in the house and do not attend festivals or visit swamis or take part in marriage ceremonies. Mourning period length varies, though Hindu scriptures caution against excessive mourning. 
 Islam Belief about death Muslims believe that there is another world after death for which the believer should prepare during their lives on earth. 
 Funeral practices 
 The corpse is bathed, wrapped in a plain cloth (called a kafan). The deceased is buried in the ground after the funeral service. Only burial in the ground is allowed according to Shari' ah (Islamic law). 
 Mourning rituals Mourners gather and offer Janazah, prayers for the forgiveness of the deceased. Once the body is buried, Muslim mourners offer one final Janazah prayer. 
 Judaism Belief about death Jews believe death in this life will eventually lead to resurrection in a world to come. 
 Funeral practices The dead are buried as soon as possible. The body is washed to purify it, dressed in a plain linen shroud. The casket, a plain wooden coffin, remains closed after the body is dressed. The body is watched over from time of death till burial, as a sign of respect. The kaddish, a prayer in honor of the dead, is said. 
 Mourning rituals There is an intense seven-day mourning period, called shiva, following the burial. Mourners traditionally rent their garments as a symbol of grief. Today, people often wear a black ribbon instead of tearing their clothes. Mourners also cover mirrors, sit on low stools, and avoid wearing leather. The full mourning period lasts a year, after which mourners observe the dead's yahrzeit, or yearly anniversary of the death. 
 Lutheran Belief about death Many Lutheran groups believe that death goes against what is naturally intended for us by God. It is thought that because of humankind's rebellion against God, death was created as a punishment. 
 Funeral practices There is usually a funeral burial service for the dead. The service takes place in a church, but can also be held in a private home, funeral home or crematory, if desired. 
 Mourning rituals A last viewing before the beginning of the funeral service takes place, after which the funereal coffin is closed. Mourners may also be invited to pray at the burial site, and those nearer to the grave may throw handfuls of earth onto the coffin as it descends into the earth. 
 Mormonism Belief about death Mormons believe that at death, the spirit and the body separate. People go to judgment by God. Death is something to mourn but is also a time of hope because it is seen as a step into the next life and eternal life with God 
 Funeral practices Funeral services are usually held in an LDS chapel or mortuary. Burial is preferred to cremation because internment in the earth symbolizes the return of dust to dust. 
 Mourning rituals The gravesite of the deceased is viewed as a sacred spot for the family to visit and tend. 
 Pagan Beliefs about death Pagans believe that physical death is not the end of life. The dead become unborn, and enter into a state where they may find temporary rest, after which healing and renewing energy for rebirth into a new life occur. 
 Funeral practices Believers in the pagan goddess traditions wash the dead body with a mixture consisting of spring water, a few drops of ocean water (or water from another special place), scented oil, and the herb rosemary for purity and protection. While washing, a special blessing is usually said. Then, the body is smudged (or censed) with an appropriate incense for the cleansing. Finally, the body is wrapped or dress in simple cloth or clothing. 
 Mourning rituals Pagans hold funerals and memorial services, during which, special prayers are said to help guide the dead to healing in their afterlife journey to rebirth. Rituals include offerings to nature and the ancestors, invoking spirits, music, chanting, sharing stories and more. 
 Presbyterianism Belief about death Presbyterian Christians believe that whether the reward of heaven or the punishment of hell, the consequences of life have a bearing on where you end up after death, and they begin immediately after death. 
 Funeral practices Most funerals take place two to four days after the death. Most services are held in the church sanctuary. Funeral practices vary from person to person. No one form of interment is either encouraged or discouraged among worshippers. 
 Mourning rituals Worshippers are encouraged to provide the "ministry of presence" to those who have experienced a loss. Whether one calls, writes or visits the bereaved, the act of being present for them is enough. 
 window.twttr = (function (d, s, id) { var js, fjs = d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], t = window.twttr || {}; if (d.getElementById(id)) return t; js = d.createElement(s); js.id = id; js.src = "https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js"; fjs.parentNode.insertBefore(js, fjs); t._e = []; t.ready = function (f) { t._e.push(f); }; return t; }(document, "script", "twitter-wjs")); 
 more from beliefnet and our partners 
 Add some inspiration to your inbox. 
 Sign up for Beliefnet's Your Health and Happiness newsletter. 
 Please also opt me in for Exclusive Offers from Beliefnet’s Partners Privacy and Data Policy 
 From time to time you will also receive Special Offers from our partners 

 id="file23242811" filename="trump-religion-megachurch-american-tradition" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/jan/08/trump-religion-megachurch-american-tradition">
 Evangelicals using religion for political gain is nothing new. It is a US tradition 
 No one who has read US history can be surprised by the hypocrisy of Evangelicals for Trump but it also tells us how their undoing will inevitably come 
 Last Friday the Trump 2020 campaign held its first rally at a megachurch. King Jesus international ministries, located outside of Miami, Florida, hosted the Evangelicals for Trump Coalition kick-off. Before boasting about his commitment to fight for the religious right’s agenda, the president bowed his head to receive prayers from prosperity preacher Paula White and other religious nationalists who offer spiritual cover for a corrupt and immoral administration. 
 As a bishop of the church, I am troubled anytime I see Christianity used to justify the injustice, deception, violence and oppression that God hates. Even if Donald Trump had a perfect personal moral résumé, his policy agenda is an affront to God’s agenda to lift the poor and bless the marginalized. The distorted moral narrative these so-called Evangelicals for Trump have embraced is contrary to God’s politics, which have nothing to do with being a Democrat or Republican. But this misuse of religion is not new. It has a long history in the American story. 
 When the segregationist George Wallace faced the moral challenge of Dr Martin Luther King Jr and the civil rights movement in 1960s Alabama, he also called upon religious leaders to vouch for him. “By no stretch of the imagination is George C Wallace a racist,  Dr Henry L Lyon, the pastor of Montgomery’s Highland Avenue Baptist church, testified. “He has shown fairness to all people, regardless of race or color,  the Rev RL Lawrence, a Methodist minister, concurred. They were vouching for the same Wallace who had infamously declared in his inaugural address: “Segregation yesterday, segregation today, segregation forever!  But they had adopted a false morality that framed King as an “agitator  and Wallace as a fair-minded defender of tradition and God’s good order. 
 This misuse of religion is, sadly, an American tradition. Colonists who cheated Native Americans out of land and forced enslaved Africans to build a new nation worshiped a God whose demand for justice troubled their conscience. “I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is just,  Thomas Jefferson wrote, acknowledging the basic moral contradiction between the principle of liberty he had appealed to in the Declaration of Independence and the practice of bondage that his plantation and the economy surrounding it depended upon. This conflict did not only exist within Jefferson’s soul. It divided every major denomination of the American church in the 19th century. 
 When abolitionists insisted on pointing out the immorality of human bondage, plantation owners responded by paying preachers and theologians to write justifications of race-based chattel slavery. They imagined a world in which the bodies and souls of black Africans were dependent on the paternalistic supervision of white civilization. Slavery was not simply a justifiable evil. It was, according to America’s slaveholder religion, a positive good. Just as they would argue in the 20th century that segregation was best for black and white people, evangelicals for Jefferson Davis contended that slavery was as good for the souls of black Africans as it was for the pocketbook of the plantation owner. 
 No one who has read American history can be surprised by the hypocrisy of Evangelicals for Trump. But we can learn from the history how their undoing will inevitably come from their public arrogance. While Davis and Wallace had power, they did not have to listen to the cries of those who suffered from the injustice they used the Bible to justify. They found religious leaders who were willing to tell them lies in order to have access to their power. But the ignorance they intentionally cultivated led them to misjudge the political realities of their day. The Confederate States of America could not last. Wallace’s 1968 run for president revealed the limits of his political imagination. 
 This theme of false religionists lying to despotic rulers runs throughout the Bible. Moses and Miriam had to contend with pharaoh’s religionists in Egypt, just as Elijah had to face the prophets of Baal at Mount Carmel. When Jesus proclaimed good news to the poor in ancient Palestine, he had to deal with religious leaders who twisted scripture to support the same governing authorities that had sought to kill him when he was a baby. 
 Religious hypocrisy is not new. But Jesus and the prophets of the Bible make clear that God hates this abuse of the holy. “Do you expect me to overlook obscene wealth you’ve piled up by cheating and fraud?  God asks through the prophet Micah. “Do you think I’ll tolerate shady deals and shifty scheming? I’m tired of the violent rich bullying their way with bluffs and lies.  These are the biblical values we have heard too little about in our public life. 
 Yes, there is a circle of Evangelicals for Trump who speak loudly about values they have long tried to associate with scripture. But that circle pales in comparison to the great cloud of moral witnesses that stretches from Moses and Miriam to Micah and Elijah; from Jesus and the disciples to Fredrick Douglass and Lucretia Mott; from Ella Baker and Martin Luther King to the moral movements for justice and equity in our world today. These moral witnesses have shown us what it means to push this nation toward a more perfect union. They have demonstrated what true faith in public life looks like. In this moment, we must remember and follow them as a coalition of moral witnesses for truth. 
 William J Barber, II is co-chair of the Poor People’s Campaign: A National Call for Moral Revival, which is mobilizing poor people and their allies for a mass assembly and march on Washington in June 2020 

 id="file23242745" filename="uk-wales-59269916" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-wales-59269916">
 Gay couple receive landmark Church in Wales blessing 
 "This is a landmark and a really big step - a time to rejoice," said Father Lee Taylor. 
 Father Lee and his partner Fabiano Da Silva Duarte have become what is thought to be the first same-sex couple to be officially blessed by the Church in Wales. 
 It comes after the Church's governing body approved a new service of blessing for same-sex couples in September. 
 However it stopped short of allowing gay couples to marry in its parishes. 
 The move has put the Church in Wales at odds with its sister Anglican church, the Church of England, which forbids clergy from blessing gay couples. 
 Father Lee said the service, at St Collen's Church, in Llangollen, Denbighshire, was "extremely special". 
 "Our civil partnership took place at our local registry office in London in 2008. Although this was an important step for us it didn't really feel like an occasion for great celebration back then," he said. 
 "The ceremony was short and no religious content was permitted. It didn't feel like a solemn and sacred moment. 
 "So this [blessing] is a really big step. It's an opportunity to celebrate our love and union in the presence of God. It is exciting - a time to rejoice." 
 He added: "We both have a deep faith and love of God and the church has always played an important part in our lives. 
 "We are very excited to have made this next step in our journey together." 
 With a choir, bell ringers and family and friends attending, Father Lee said the ceremony had the "look and smell" of a traditional wedding. 
 "It has been a very moving and meaningful service for us. It had all the bells and whistles but without the actual marriage part," added Father Lee. 
 However he admitted there were mixed emotions given same-sex marriages are still not permitted by the Church in Wales. 
 A blessing signifies, in theological terms, God's approval. It marks a significant shift from the historical church teaching that homosexual relationships are sinful. 
 However, the Evangelical Fellowship opposed the move, saying at the time it did not uphold the "standard of Christian marriage between one man and one woman". 
 "It feels like we are only half way there. I would like to see the Church in Wales move forward now with same-sex marriages in church," said Father Lee. 
 "I believe that making a covenant with our spouse in marriage is a reflection of God's own covenant with us through Jesus." 
 The Bishop of St Asaph, the Right Revered Gregory Cameron, led the service at St Collen's Church, Llangollen, where Father Taylor is priest-in-charge. 
 He said it was "a great honour and privilege" to lead the first blessing for a gay couple that the Church was aware of. 
 Clergy have a "conscience clause" which means they can opt out of offering the blessing if they disagree. 
 The Scottish Episcopal Church became the first Anglican church in the UK to allow same-sex marriages in 2017. 
 Other Christian denominations in the UK that permit same-sex marriages include the Quakers in Britain, the General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches, and the United Reformed Church. 

 id="file23242537" filename="Understanding_the_Mass_the_Rite_of_Blessing_and_Sprinkling_Holy_Water.pdf" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://d2y1pz2y630308.cloudfront.net/12996/documents/2016/2/Understanding_the_Mass_the_Rite_of_Blessing_and_Sprinkling_Holy_Water.pdf">
1
Understanding the Mass: The Rite of Blessing and Sprinkling of Holy Water
Appendix II of the 3rd Edition of the Roman Missal reads;
1. On Sundays, especially in Easter Time, the blessing and sprinkling of water as a
memorial of Baptism may take place from time to time in all churches and chapels,
even in Masses anticipated on Saturday evenings.
If this rite is celebrated during Mass, it takes the place of the usual Penitential Act at
the beginning of Mass.
2. After the greeting, the Priest stands at his chair and faces the people. With a vessel
containing the water to be blessed before him, he calls upon the people to pray in
these or similar words.
Dear brothers and sisters, let us humbly beseech the Lord our God to bless this water he has
created, which will be sprinkled on us as a memorial of our baptism. May he help us by his
grace to remain faithful to the spirit we have received.
And after a brief pause of silence, he continues with his hands joined:
Almighty ever living God, who willed that through water, the fountain of life and the source
of purification, every soul should be cleansed and receive the gift of eternal life; be pleased, we
pray, to + bless this water, by which we seek protection on this your day, O Lord. Renew
the living springs of

your grace within us and grant that by

this water we may be

defended from all ills of spirit and

body, and so

approach you with hearts made clean

and worthy to receive

your salvation.

Through Christ our Lord.
Amen.
Other similar prayers are used inside of Easter Time between Easter and Pentecost.
In addition, the Roman Missal reads:
3. Where the circumstances of the place or the custom of the people suggest that the
mixing of salt be preserved in the blessing of the water, the priest may bless salt,
saying:

2
We humbly ask you, almighty God: be pleased in your faithful love to + bless the salt you
have created, for it was you who commanded the prophet Elisha to cast salt into water, that
impure water might be purified. Grant, O Lord, we pray, that, wherever this mixture of salt
and water is sprinkled, every attack of the enemy may be repulsed and your Holy Spirit may
be present to keep us safe at all times.
Through Christ our Lord.
Amen.
Then he pours salt into the water, without saying anything.
4. Afterward, taking

the aspergillum, the priest sprinkles

himself and the

ministers, then the clergy and the

people, moving

through the church, if appropriate.

Meanwhile, one of

the following chants, or another

appropriate chant is sung.
Outside Easter Time
Antiphon 1

Sprinkle me with hyssop, O Lord and I shall be cleansed; wash me and

I shall be whiter than snow. (Psalm 51:9)
Antiphon 2

I will pour clean water upon you, and you will be made clean of all your

impurities, and I shall give you a new spirit, says the Lord. (Ezekiel 36:25-26)
Antiphon 3

Blessed be the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who in his

great mercy has given us new birth into a living hope through the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead, into an inheritance that will not perish, preserved for us
in heaven for the salvation to be revealed in the last time!

3
During Easter Time
Antiphon 1

I saw water flowing from the Temple, from its right-hand side, Alleluia:

and all to whom this water came were saved and shall say: Alleluia, Alleluia. (Cf.
Ezekiel 47:1-2, 9)
Antiphon 2

On the day of my Resurrection, says the Lord, Alleluia, I will gather the

nations and assemble the kingdoms and I will pour clean water upon you, hallelujah.
(Cf. Wis. 3:8; Ez. 36:25)
There are additional options during Easter time, but the main theme of the Rite of
Blessing and Sprinkling of Holy Water is a cleansing of sins to prepare ourselves to
celebrate the Sacred Mysteries. Ezekiel 36 is worth quoting in full. Ezekiel writes:
I will sprinkle clean water over you to make you clean; from all your impurities and from all
your idols I will cleanse you.

I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit I will

put within you. I will remove

the heart of stone from your flesh and give you a

heart of flesh. I will put my spirit within you so that you walk in my statutes, observe my
ordinances, and keep them (Ezekiel 36:25-27).
The cleansing and the new heart and the new spirit in Ezekiel mirror Psalm 51, which
we discussed in the Penitential Act.
5. When he returns to his chair and the singing is over, the Priest stands facing the
people, and, with hands joined, says:
May almighty God cleanse us from our sins, and through the celebration of
this Eucharist make us worthy to share at the table of his kingdom.
Amen.
6. Then when it is prescribed, the hymn Gloria in Excelsis (Glory to God in the
highest) is sung or said. 1

1

3rd Edition of the Roman Missal Appendix II

4
In his book, “The Mystery of Faith: A Study of the Structural Elements of the Order
of the Mass  Lawrence Johnson explains the history and origin of the “sprinkling
rite.’ He writes,
Until the liturgical reform after the Second Vatican Council, a rite known as the Asperges
was celebrated before the principal Mass on Sunday. The word comes from Psalm 51:9:
“Cleanse me with the sin of hyssop, that I may be purified.  Verses of the psalm were sung
while the priest walked through the church and sprinkled holy water over the people. During
Paschal time the Asperges was replaced by the Vidi Aquam, a text based on Ezekiel 47:
1, 8,9: I saw water flowing from out beneath a threshold of the temple.  2
Johnson adds, “This custom, which gained popularity in the Middle Ages, seems to have
originated in eighth-century monasticism as a sign of sanctification. A procession moved through the
cloister, and its rooms were sprinkled. 3 Have you ever had your house blessed? Each room
is sprinkled with holy water as the priest moves throughout the house.
In summary, Johnson writes, “this sprinkling with water is a visual reminder of
Baptism (the foundational sacrament of all repentance) and the unique character of Sunday. Through
the sacraments of Christian initiation we die, are buried, and rise again with Christ: we thereby
share in Christ’s victory over sin and death. Although the sprinkling is not a penitential rite,
nonetheless, every Sunday is a Paschal Feast celebrating the memorial of the Lord’s Resurrection
which is the taproot of all reconciliation. 4
We get the word aspergillum, which is the stick-shaped instrument or branchtype instrument that gathers

the blessed water from the aspesory (the

vessel that holds the holy-

water), and is used to project the holy

water onto the faithful.

There are many shapes and forms of this

aspergillum or aspergilla available today.

2

The Mystery of Faith: A Study of the Structural Elements of the Order of the Mass Pg. 19
Ibid Pg. 19
4
Ibid Pg. 19
3

5
Photo Sources:
Pope Pius XII Blessing Water Pg. 1
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=images&cd=&cad=
rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiS5ZmokarJAhUKpYgKHd_1Bc0QjRwIBw&url=http
%3A%2F%2Fwww.salvemariaregina.info%2FSalveMariaRegina%2FSMR160%2FEaster%2520Octave%2520Customs.htm&bvm=bv.108194040,d.cGU&psig
=AFQjCNFNcp-26BbbnKavXvkMNbzKEcv9Pg&ust=1448491376209100
Pope Francis Sprinkling the faithful Pg. 2
http://www.google.com/imgres?imgurl=http://d2jkk5z9de9jwi.cloudfront.net/cont
ent/uploads/2015/05/20150524cnsph0031800x500.jpg&imgrefurl=http://www.catholicherald.co.uk/news/2015/05/26/francis
-i-havent-watched-tv-since-1990-after-making-promise-to-ourlady/&h=500&w=800&tbnid=hJYpNcXQbG0FHM:&docid=VZTAacPsjJ7bjM&ei
=ieVUVsmaO4P1oATK5LzADw&tbm=isch&client=safari&ved=0ahUKEwiJg_Lbj
qrJAhWDOogKHUoyD_gQMwgeKAIwAg
Ezekiel Pg. 3
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=images&cd=&cad=
rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwj9mM64kqrJAhUTNIgKHbHBpQQjRwIBw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fen.wikipedia.org%2Fwiki%2FEzekiel&bvm
=bv.108194040,d.cGU&psig=AFQjCNFNNuaeoX1_NDDTvbv3C1E1RQdjLA&us
t=1448491676739661
Aspergellum Pg. 4 http://www.fisheaters.com/aspergill.jpg

6

7

 id="file23242685" filename="vatican-congregation-doctrine-faith-morandi-242170" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.americamagazine.org/faith/2022/01/10/vatican-congregation-doctrine-faith-morandi-242170">
 Pope Francis removes from Vatican doctrine office archbishop who is believed to have banned same-sex blessings 
 Pope Francis delivers the Angelus noon prayer in St.Peter's Square, at the Vatican, Sunday, Jan. 9, 2022. (AP Photo/Gregorio Borgia) 
 ROME (AP) — Pope Francis took the first step Monday to reorganize the Vatican’s powerful doctrine office, removing the No. 2 official widely believed responsible for a controversial document barring blessings for same-sex couples because God “cannot bless sin.  
 Francis named Archbishop Giacomo Morandi, currently the secretary of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, bishop of the Italian diocese of Reggio Emilia-Guastalla. The move amounts to a demotion since Morandi currently has the title of archbishop, yet is heading to a small diocese, not an archdiocese. 
 The Vatican said Morandi would nevertheless retain the title of archbishop “ad personam.  
 The move from the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith amounts to a demotion since Morandi currently has the title of archbishop, yet is heading to a small diocese, not an archdiocese. 
 The Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, or CDF, is one of the most important Vatican offices, interpreting doctrine for the universal Catholic Church, sanctioning dissenters and handling cases of clergy sexual abuse of minors. Morandi joined the CDF as an under-secretary in 2015 and was promoted to secretary, or the No. 2, in 2017. 
 He was widely seen as being behind the March 2021 document that outraged the gay community, which Francis has made pains to welcome into the church fold.The document declared that the Catholic Church won’t bless same-sex unions because God “cannot bless sin.  The document said Francis had been informed of the document and “gave his assent  to its publication, but Francis was apparently taken by surprise by its impact. 
 Archbishop Morandi was widely seen as being behind the March 2021 document barring same-sex blessings that outraged the gay community, which Francis has made pains to welcome into the church fold. 
 Francis has since made several gestures of outreach to the gay Catholic community and their advocates, including a recent letter congratulating an American nun once sanctioned by the CDF, Sister Jeannine Gramick, on her 50 years of LGBTQ ministry. 
 The CDF is currently headed by the Jesuit Cardinal Luis Ladaria, but he is expected to retire relatively soon since he turns 78 in April, three years beyond the normal retirement age for bishops. 
 Francis has made several gestures of outreach to the gay Catholic community, including a recent letter congratulating a nun once sanctioned by the CDF, Sister Jeannine Gramick, on her 50 years of LGBTQ ministry. 
 Aside from Morandi, there are two “additional secretaries  in the CDF, including the American Archbishop Joseph Di Noia, who also is due to retire soon since he turns 79 in July. The other is Archbishop Charles Scicluna, but he has a full-time job as archbishop of Malta. 
 The impending retirements and transfer of Morandi thus suggests some management changes at the office, though they probably won’t be announced until Francis releases the blueprint of his reform of the Vatican’s overall bureaucracy, expected sometime this year. 
 Before you can comment, you need to update your profile to include your first and last name, as required in our comments policy. Then reload this page and you'll be set up for commenting. Update your profile 
 The latest from america 
 Once declared, St. Irenaeus would be the second doctor of the church named by Pope Francis. He would bring the total number of doctors of the church to 37. 
 A law firm’s report on how abuse cases were handled in the Archdiocese of Munich and Freising faualted retired Pope Benedict XVI, with lawyers accusing him of “misconduct  in four cases during his tenure as Munich archbishop. 
 The future of the pro-life movement may depend on a move away from partisan politics. That was one conclusion of an online panel discussion on “Pro-life Movement at a Crossroads: Dobbs and a Divided Society.  
 Rutilio Grande bore mental health issues as his personal cross. Now he can become a patron saint for all Catholics who seek and deserve mental health care. 

 id="file23242765" filename="wedding-blessings" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.weddingforward.com/wedding-blessings/">
 30 Beautiful Wedding Blessings And Prayers For You 
 It’s a great gift and blessing from Heaven to find real love. Wedding unites people, unites their hearts and souls. According to wedding traditions, at the ceremony or reception, one of the guests says wedding blessings to a young couple. 
 blessings & prayers 
 Nowadays it’s not obligatory to be done by religious prayer, as we tend to think, but possibly just a wish for newlyweds’ happiness and prosperity. Here, we’ve picked up everything you need to know about wedding blessings. 
 A Tradition Of Wedding Blessings And Prayers 
 Firstly, let’s answer the question “what exactly is a blessing?  A blessing is mercy, benefit, approval. In general, people used to say the blessing before or after a meal, or when they favored someone or something. 
 They mostly appeal to a High Power, asking for the guard, protection, health, and peace. Speaking about wedding blessings, they don’t differ much. We also ask for all the best, but precisely for the bride and groom, for their marriage, well-being, and a bright future. 
 ADVERTISEMENT 
 When It’s Time To Say Your Wedding Blessing 
 Traditionally, a blessing is given during the ceremony or at the reception before dinner. Depending on customs and the couple’s preferences, it’s said either by a religious leader or by a family member. Generally, it goes before the ceremony to grace all the guests, to invite holiness to the venue. But in the end, the blessing is to pray for God’s approval of the new marriage. 
 At the reception, you might say wedding blessings to a family member, like a father’s pray to a son, sister’s blessing, etc. 
 However, they all vary in length, it could be long marriage quotes or just a short saying, but they all have care, kindness, and goodwill in common. 
 Religious Wedding Prayers 
 Religious wedding blessings are those which appeal to God. They could be taken from the Bible as a quote, or be simply directed to divine forces. For example, English traditional vows are usually written on the base of the Bible but don’t sound very pious. 
 ADVERTISEMENT 
 Christian Wedding Blessings 
 #1 
 “May God bless, keep and guide you the rest of your lives. Happy Wedding Day!  
 “Rejoice in your love for each other! God bless you now and always.  
 “God bless this marriage and may your love for each other continue to grow.  
 “May God bless the two of you abundantly in love, joy, and happiness.  
 “We are praying that God guides you in your new adventure. May God pour out blessings on you two.  
 “Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate. Mark 10:9  
 “Rejoice in your love for each other! God bless you now and always.  
 “As you become one in Christ, we wish you more joy and blessings.  
 “There is no fear in love, but perfect love casteth out fear. I John 4:18  
 “We are praying that God guides you in your new adventure. May God pour out blessings on you two.  
 ADVERTISEMENT 
 Jewish Wedding Blessings 
 #2 
 Jewish people take wedding ceremonies seriously. They pay a lot of attention to it and make efforts to keep and cherish their customs. One of them is ShevaB’rachot, Seven Blessings. Jewish wedding blessings are the pray for the bride’s and groom’s joy, companionship, love, and peace. Let’s have a look at some examples: 
 “A good marriage is at least 80 percent good luck in finding the right person at the right time. The rest is trust.  
 “Here’s to health and prosperity, To you and all your posterity. And them that doesn’t drink with sincerity, That they may be damned for all eternity!  
 “May all your hopes and dreams come true, and may the memory of this day become dearer with each passing year  
 Catholic Wedding Blessing 
 #3 
 There’s no time limit to when a Catholic Wedding Blessing can occur but it’s customary to perform a blessing shortly after the wedding ceremony, often on the same day and always by an ordained minister. 
 The wedding blessing is especially important to the Catholic faith and comes in quite handy when couples are of mixed religions. Non-denominational or non-traditional weddings are often not recognized by the Catholic church. Performing a blessing after the wedding ceremony will render the marriage officially recognized by the church. This is important because marriage is one of the 7 sacraments which channels the grace of God. 
 “Lord blesses this beautiful couple with love and hope we pray. Keep alive forevermore the vows they’ve pledged today. May you bless their dreams and visions, And keep them always safe. May peace and joy be with them now On this their wedding day.  
 ADVERTISEMENT 
 Pagan Wedding Blessing Examples 
 #4 
 Paganism is defined as a Polytheist or, more loosely, someone who holds religious beliefs outside of the main world religions. Because this type of belief system is so broad, it makes it hard to define what a Pagan wedding blessing is. Typically these religions carry a strong connection with Mother Nature. If the wedding blessing prayer doesn’t include Her directly, it will evoke the gods of love, courage, truth, honor, or a combination of these. If you’re attending a Pagan wedding for the first time, don’t be nervous. You’ll find that the majority of the event is very familiar. 
 “Now you are bound one to the other With a tie not easy to break. Take the time of binding Before the final vows are made To learn what you need to know – To grow in wisdom and love. That your marriage will be strong That your love will last In this life and beyond.  
 Papal Wedding Blessing 
 #5 
 A Papal Wedding Blessing is a certificate complete with the Papal seal and current Pope’s photo. Receiving a Papal wedding blessing can only be granted to a practicing baptized Catholic and a member of a pastor’s parish. But, the process is rather simple. 
 All one has to do is fax or mailed to the Parchment Office in Vatican City with at least 2 months’ time for processing. Some Catholics will go to the trouble to travel all the way to Rome for the honor of a Papal blessing. Either way, there is no more meaningful blessing than a Benediction Papal. 
 ADVERTISEMENT 
 Hindu Wedding Blessing Samples 
 #6 
 A Hindu priest (pandit) often performs Hindu wedding blessings, but they can also be performed by interfaith priests. There are 7 fairly particular blessings involved in this religious wedding ceremony. 
 First, the God of fire (Agni) is summoned by igniting a sacred fire. The 7 blessings follow. 
 “May this couple be blessed with an abundance of resources and comforts, and be helpful to one another in all ways. 
 May this couple be strong and complement one another. 
 May this couple be blessed with prosperity and riches on all levels. 
 May this couple be eternally happy. 
 May this couple be blessed with a happy family life. 
 May this couple live in perfect harmony… true to their personal values and their joint promises. 
 May this couple always be the best of friends.  
 Non-Religious Wedding Blessings 
 No doubt, there are families and young couples who are not really close to any religion. Some statistics say their number dominates. Still, people want to say something warm, cheerful, and motivating to the newlyweds. Speaking of non-religious wedding blessings, they are similar to the religious ones, but you just won’t hear the name of God in them. 
 When you say wish or blessing, it’s crucial to be yourself, to feel at ease, and speak from your heart. So, in case you are not a member of any confession, don’t feel uncomfortable and choose one of the following timeless wedding blessings: 
 “May the years ahead be filled with lasting joy.  
 “May today be the beginning of a long, happy life together.  
 “Best wishes on this wonderful journey, as you build your new lives together.  
 “Wishing you joy, love, and happiness on your wedding day, and as you begin your new life together.  
 “Wishing you a lifetime of love and happiness.  
 “Congratulations on the most important union of your life! May you two always find love and hope in the company of one another.  
 “My best wishes to two very exceptional people. Nothing makes me prouder than to tell the world that both of you are my friends. Enjoy a happy, fulfilling married life!  
 “Here’s to you two—wishing my two favorite lovebirds a lifetime of happiness and love. Congrats on a beautiful wedding!  
 “Warmest wishes to a fantastic couple. Here’s to a lifetime of adventure, love, and happiness! Congratulations on your matrimony.  
 “I hope that every day you two spend together is as blissful and love-filled as possible. Here’s to one of my all-time favorite couples! Congratulations.  
 ADVERTISEMENT 
 Wedding Dinner Blessing 
 In many religions, it’s common to perform a blessing before a meal begins. Diners will recognize how fortunate they are to be able to receive nourishment and will thank God(s) for the gift of life. 
 Wedding dinner blessings take things a step further by honoring the couple and asking for God to provide them with joy, strength, and fruitfulness. Christian and Jewish dinners have specific phrases to be read. In Pagan ceremonies, it’s not unusual to hear wedding blessing poems or wedding blessing quotes. 
 Breaking bread has been part of rituals and ceremonies for thousands of years, and there’s still no better way to bless a marriage. Here is a traditional religious wedding dinner blessing example: 
 “Thank you, Creator, for bringing (name) and (name) together in such a happy way. We ask the Universe to bless this couple and their future together. May happiness and joy be a hallmark of their relationship. As they explore their love for each other, establish a home, and build a life together, may they be strengthened by the love and encouragement of those gathered here today. If times get hard, may they remember the commitment they made today and the joy that brought them together? Help them to learn from one another and grow strong as both individuals and a couple. May the food we eat now bring strength to us, and may we all enjoy this time of celebration and friendship. Amen.  
 More Blessings For You 
 In fact, each culture is always interesting and charming when you find out about its wedding traditions. It’s always quite intriguing to discover what rituals people carry out to unite their souls. By the way, the brightest wedding blessings are said in Ireland. 
 Look, they are awesome: 
 “Always remember to forget the things that made you sad. But never forget to remember the things that made you glad. Always remember to forget the friends that proved untrue. But never forget to remember those that have stuck by you. Always remember to forget the troubles that passed away. But never forget to remember the blessings that come each day  
 “May you have the love that never ends, lots of money, and lots of friends. Health be yours, whatever you do, and may God send many blessings to you!  
 The other interesting wedding traditions are, in our opinion, from Japan. They have quite strict rituals before the day of the marriage and very meaningful bride’s accessories. Japanese wedding blessings are called Norito. Here’s one of them: 
 “Bless them as unmoving and eternal May their lives flourish like luxuriant trees. May they, bride and groom, together with heaven and earth, with the sun and the moon, continue to give out light and radiance. Thus we do reverently pray.  
 Now you know a lot about wedding blessings. We hope you’ve found inspiration here and now feel confident to write your own, the very best wedding blessing. 

 id="file23242851" filename="what-can-you-do-theology-degree" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.timeshighereducation.com/student/subjects/what-can-you-do-theology-degree">
 What can you do with a theology degree? 
 Why study a theology degree? Our essential guide to what you will learn on a theology course, what you should study to get your place on a degree, and what jobs you can get once you graduate 
 Guides 
 October 3 2019 
 Share 
 What is theology? 
 Theology is the study of religion. It examines the human experience of faith, and how different people and cultures express it. Theologians examine the many different religions of the world and their impact on society. Today we are more aware than ever of the profound influence religion has on us, even if we do not follow it ourselves. Understanding this can help us understand the laws, wars, traditions and morals of our own society and that of others. 
 The study of theology is part philosophy, part history, part anthropology, and also something entirely its own. Theologians have the complex job of thinking about and debating the nature of God. Studying theology means taking on challenging questions about the meaning of religion. It also requires being able to compare the different religions in a knowledgeable, balanced way. 
 While some students take theology in preparation for a career in the church, you don’t have to be religious to have an interest in religion. Likewise, you can be from a certain faith but study other beliefs. 
 What do you learn in a theology degree? 
 A theology degree may cover a variety of different religions, or may specifically look at just one or two, depending on the course requirements and the module choices of the student. Any theology degree is likely to include modules on the history of one or more religions. 
 Instruction on a religious text, such as the Bible, Torah or Quran, and how to interpret it, is a major part of most theology degrees. Students will discuss the significance of these religious texts, answering questions such as: to what extent are they open to interpretation? Are they the word of God? 
 In order to better get to grips with the texts, some universities offer students the chance to learn their original language, such as Arabic, Hebrew or ancient Greek. While some courses will accept students working with translations of the texts, for others it is a requirement of the course to learn an ancient language. 
 Theology degrees cover some of the most challenging philosophical and ethical discussions of all time, delving into the minds of the great theological thinkers of the past. Depending on the course, students may also study the relationships between the church and different social groups, such as women or indigenous people. 
 What should I study at high school if I want to study theology? 
 In order to study theology, the most common basic requirement is for applicants to have experience in essay-writing. Studying at least one essay-based subject, such as English, history, philosophy or classics will help demonstrate the necessary skill to write theology essays. Most courses do not require students to have a background in any particular subject, although if a course in religious studies or theology is available it might help you decide if theology is the right subject for you. 
 What do people who study theology do after graduation? 
 For many students, a degree in theology is a step towards their calling to work in the church. A theology degree is a good place to start for anyone wanting to pursue their faith, whether as a minister, a pastor or a youth worker. 
 Many theology students go into further study, teaching or careers in a wide variety of fields. Students learn a wide variety of skills through theology, like critical thinking, clear writing, problem solving and analysis of social and historical trends. These lend themselves to any number of different jobs. 
 For this reason, theology students go on to work as journalists, politicians, accountants, police officers, interior designers; the spectrum of possibilities is almost limitless. A substantial percentage of theology graduates train for a career in law. The ethical aspect of theology lends itself to a career in the third sector, and many graduates end up working for charities and non-governmental organisations, either with a religious mission or without. 
 Which famous people studied theology? 
 A look at some famous theology graduates shows just how dynamic a degree in this subject can be. David Nussbaum, who has been the CEO of multiple UK charities has both an undergraduate and a master’s degree in theology. 
 Jack Gleeson who played Joffrey Lannister from Game of Thrones enrolled as a theology student, after his time on the show. One of the most inspiring theology graduates is Dr Martin Luther King Jr, who earned his doctorate in theology at the University of Boston in the same year he led the Montgomery bus boycott. 

 id="file23242570" filename="what-does-it-mean-to-be-blessed.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.christianitytoday.com/biblestudies/bible-answers/theology/what-does-it-mean-to-be-blessed.html">
 What does it mean to be blessed? 
 I've always been intrigued by the idea presented in The Arabian Nights, when Aladdin finds the lamp and a genie permits him a wish. It makes me wonder what I would choose if given such a choice. Since I've never been wildly wealthy, the first things that come to mind are endless riches, a dream house, or luxury travel. But as soon as I think of those things, I wonder if that's really what I want. I think of some of the names we see constantly in the tabloids and wonder if they would trade all their fame and fortune for some inner peace and a sense that what they're doing matters. 
 Of course, if I read my Bible with the intent of obeying what it says, I'll find it difficult to wish for wealth and luxury. Jesus said things such as, "the Son of Man has no place to lay his head" (Matthew 8:20), and "those who are last now will be first then, and those who are first will be last" (Matthew 20:16, NLT), and "When someone has been given much, much will be required in return" (Luke 12:48, NLT), and "These things dominate the thoughts of unbelievers, but your heavenly Father already knows all your needs" (Matthew 6:32, NLT). 
 What was Jesus' purpose in saying such things? Was it just to be a killjoy? Did he want to make sure we were miserable while here on Earth so we would long for heaven? Or was it because he knew what would really make us happy? 
 To Be Blessed Means … 
 One of my favorite Scripture passages is the Beatitudes in Matthew 5:1-12, where Jesus lists what it means to be blessed. It's certainly not what comes to my mind when I think of being blessed or when I pray for others to be blessed. Remember all those childhood prayers, "Bless Mommy, Daddy, and Auntie Sue"? We had no idea what we were saying! We were actually saying, "Let them be poor in spirit, mourning, meek, hungering and thirsting for righteousness, merciful, pure, peacemakers, and persecuted." 
 So how could such things lead to happiness? It seems like they lead more to the opposite of happiness. But the Beatitudes tell us one thing clearly. We can never be happy when we live self-centered lives. We may be fooled into thinking we're happy for a while, but eventually it will fold in on us because true happiness can be found only in a relationship with our Creator. Only the One who made us knows what will truly make us happy and give us satisfaction in life. We have to get to the end of ourselves and the beginning of God to gain any lasting contentment in life. And that can happen only through divine revelation and transformation through God's Word and the Holy Spirit dwelling in us. It's the "pearl of great value" (Matthew 13:46), worth selling everything to gain it. And ultimately, it's the secret to true satisfaction. 
 Digging Deeper 
 If you found a genie in a lamp, what would you wish for? Quick, name the first thing that comes to your mind. After you've named it, take time to think about it. Would that really make you happy? Why or why not? 
 Have you ever been physically hungry or thirsty to the extreme—perhaps after an illness, an intense workout, or during a hot spell? If so, think back to that experience. Read Psalm 63:1, Matthew 5:6, and John 6:35. What do you think it means to hunger and thirst after God? Why is this essential to being satisfied about life? 
 Do Something about It 
 Spend time reading the Beatitudes (Matthew 5:1-12) and asking God to give you insight into what they mean in your life. Pray that God will give you a desire for him that is all-consuming. Ask for victory over anything that keeps you from desiring him in such a way. And ask that God give you a real sense of what it means to be satisfied. 
 JoHannah Reardon is the former managing editor of ChristianBibleStudies.com. She blogs at www.johannahreardon.com and is the author of numerous books and devotional guides. 

 id="file23242606" filename="what-is-blessed-be-2561872" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.learnreligions.com/what-is-blessed-be-2561872">
 Patti Wigington is a pagan author, educator, and licensed clergy. She is the author of Daily Spellbook for the Good Witch, Wicca Practical Magic and The Daily Spell Journal. 
 The phrase “blessed be  is found in many modern magical traditions. Although it appears in some Pagan paths, it’s typically more likely to be used in a NeoWiccan context. It’s often used as a greeting, and to say “Blessed be  to someone indicates that you wish good and positive things upon them. 
 The phrase’s origins are a bit more murky. It is part of a longer ritual which is included in some Gardnerian Wiccan initiation ceremonies. During that rite, the High Priest or High Priest delivers what it known as the Five Fold Kiss, and recites, 
 Blessed be thy feet, which have brought thee in these ways, Blessed be thy knees, that shall kneel at the sacred altar, Blessed be thy womb, without which we would not be, Blessed be thy breasts, formed in beauty, Blessed be thy lips, that shall utter the Sacred Names of the gods. 
 It’s important to keep in mind that Wicca is a newer religion, and many of its terms and rituals are rooted in Thelema, ceremonial magic, and hermetic mysticism. As such, it’s not surprising that many phrases–including “Blessed be –appear in other places long before Gerald Gardner incorporated them into his original Book of Shadows. 
 In fact, the King James Bible includes the verse, “Blessed be the name of the Lord.  
 "Blessed Be" Outside of Ritual 
 Many times, people use the phrase "blessed be" as a greeting or parting salutation. But, if this is a phrase rooted in the sacred, should it be used in a more casual context? Some people don't think so. 
 Some practitioners feel that the use of sacred phrases like "Blessed be" should only be used within the orthopraxic context of traditional Wiccan practice, i.e. in rituals and ceremonies. In other words, using it outside of the context of the spiritual and sacred is simply inappropriate. It is regarded as a sacred and spiritual phrase, and not something that you might shout across the parking lot at the pet store, or to an acquaintance at a social gathering, or a coworker on the elevator. 
 On the other hand, some people use it as part of regular, non-ritual conversation. BaalOfWax follows a NeoWiccan tradition, and he says, 
 "I use blessed be as a greeting outside of ritual when I'm saying hello or goodbye to other Pagans and Wiccans, although I generally reserve it for people I've stood in circle with, rather than casual acquaintances. If I'm writing an email that's coven related, I usually sign off with blessed be, or just BB, because everyone understands the usage. What I don't do, though, is use it when I'm talking to my grandma, my co-workers, or the cashier at the Piggly Wiggly." 
 In April 2015, Wiccan priestess Deborah Maynard delivered the first prayer by a Wiccan in the Iowa House of Representatives, and included the phrase in her closing remarks. Her invocation ended with: 
 "We call this morning to Spirit, which is ever present, to help us respect the interdependent web of all existence of which we are a part. Be with this legislative body and guide them to seek justice, equity and compassion in the work that is before them today. Blessed Be, Aho, and Amen." 
 You may decide that you'd like to use "Blessed be" outside of ritual, but only with other Pagans — and that's okay too. 
 Do I Have to Use "Blessed Be"? 
 Like many other phrases in the Pagan lexicon, there is no universal rule that you must use “Blessed Be  as a greeting or in a ritual context, or even at all. The Pagan community tends to be divided on this; some people use it on a regular basis, others feel uncomfortable saying it because it's just not part of their liturgical vocabulary. If using it feels forced or insincere to you, then by all means, skip it. Likewise, if you say it to someone and they tell you they'd rather you didn't, then respect their wishes the next time you encounter that individual. 
 "The expression just wishes blessings upon someone, from a non-specific source. This seems to fit Paganism very well; with such a variety of deities, and indeed with some forms of Paganism and witchcraft having no deities at all, wishing blessings upon another without reference to where those blessings are coming from would be appropriate for any Pagan, no matter what their individual creed." 
 If your tradition requires it, then feel free to incorporate it in ways that feel natural and comfortable and appropriate. Otherwise, it’s a matter of personal preference. The choice to use "Blessed Be," or to not use it at all, is entirely up to you. 
 Wigington, Patti. "Blessed Be." Learn Religions, Aug. 27, 2020, learnreligions.com/what-is-blessed-be-2561872. Wigington, Patti. (2020, August 27). Blessed Be. Retrieved from https://www.learnreligions.com/what-is-blessed-be-2561872 Wigington, Patti. "Blessed Be." Learn Religions. https://www.learnreligions.com/what-is-blessed-be-2561872 (accessed January 20, 2022). 
 Your Privacy Rights 
 Learn Religions and our third-party partners use cookies and process personal data like unique identifiers based on your consent to store and/or access information on a device, display personalized ads and for content measurement, audience insight, and product development. To change or withdraw your consent choices for LearnReligions.com, including your right to object where legitimate interest is used, click below. At any time, you can update your settings through the "EU Privacy" link at the bottom of any page. These choices will be signaled globally to our partners and will not affect browsing data. List of Partners (vendors) 
 We and our partners process data to: 
 Actively scan device characteristics for identification. Use precise geolocation data. Store and/or access information on a device. Select personalised content. Create a personalised content profile. Measure ad performance. Select basic ads. Create a personalised ads profile. Select personalised ads. Apply market research to generate audience insights. Measure content performance. Develop and improve products. List of Partners (vendors) 

 id="file23242815" filename="which-of-the-following-is-an-example-of-civil-religion.html" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://raymundtamayo.com/theology/which-of-the-following-is-an-example-of-civil-religion.html">
 What is an example of civil religion? 
 Examples of civil religious beliefs are reflected in statements used in the research such as the following: “America is God’s chosen nation today.  … “Holidays like the Fourth of July are religious as well as patriotic.  “God Bless America  
 Is civil religion a religion? 
 Civil religion, a public profession of faith that aims to inculcate political values and that prescribes dogma, rites, and rituals for citizens of a particular country. 
 What belief is Roman civil religion based on? 
 Roman civil religion consisted in the knowledge that the gods were benevolent partners of the mortals in the management of the world for the benefit of all citizens. It was based on the liberty to establish beneficial relations with the gods founded on reason rather than fear. 
 What is civil religion According to Bellah? 
 A civil religion is a phrase created by Bellah to describe how nationalism has become a belief system like religion. It is argued that a civil religion performs the same functions as religion by uniting people through shared beliefs, experiences and rituals. 
 What is the nature and purpose of civil religion in America? 
 Civil Religion in America: Overview 
 Terms 
 Explanations 
 Civil religion 
 the elements of cultural and political life that connect to a higher purpose and meaning, often bonding the people of a nation together 
 Is patriotism a religion? 
 The narrative and liturgical nature of patriotism places it firmly in the sphere of religion. Thus it is theology and not ethnicity, politics, geography, or law that provides the best lens through which to critically observe nationalism and patriotism. 
 Why is civil religion important? 
 Civil religion is an important component of public life in America, especially at the national level for its celebration of nationalism. Sociologists report that its “feast days  are Thanksgiving, Veterans Day, and Memorial Day. Its rituals include salutes to the flag and singing “God Bless America . 
 Does the UK have a civil religion? 
 In the UK, the monarchy has also provided a focus for sentiments of what might be called civil religion. For example, the Queen is the symbol of British identity in that she is head of state yet she is also the Head of the Church of England. 
 Did Rousseau believe that religion should be part of the government? 
 Despite these differences, one agreement is clear—both Rousseau and Locke believed that the interaction of the state with religion must be managed, and that one, either religion or the state, must be subordinate to the other. 
 What did Romans believe in before Christianity? 
 As different cultures settled in what would later become Italy, each brought their own gods and forms of worship. This made the religion of ancient Rome polytheistic, in that they worshipped many gods. They also worshipped spirits. Rivers, trees, fields and buildings each had their own spirit, or numen. 
 What religion were Romans before Jesus? 
 From the beginning Roman religion was polytheistic. From an initial array of gods and spirits, Rome added to this collection to include both Greek gods as well as a number of foreign cults. 
 What was the Roman religion called? 
 The Religio Romana (literally, the “Roman Religion ) constituted the major religion of the city in antiquity. The first gods held sacred by the Romans were Jupiter, the highest, and Mars, the god of war, and father of Rome’s twin founders, Romulus and Remus, according to tradition. 
 What did Bellah analyze? 
 Bellah analyses the role of religion in much the same way as classical functionalists such as Durkheim, hence he has been labelled a neo-functionalist in many A-level sociology text books. … Bellah argues that ‘Americanism’ is the civil religion of America. 
 In what sense is civil religion a new way of being religious and in what sense is it a very old way of being religious? 
 While civil religion is a fairly new idea and therefore an obviously new way of being religious, it is based on history and foundations of civilization. this makes it the oldest way of being religious. history is old, and the religion has an emphasis on a state’s history. 
 How was religion affected by the civil war? 
 Religion provided comfort to the anxious and grieving, but also offered rationalizations for suffering and anguish, for victory and defeat. Battles and their results became signs of divine intent, a pattern of thought that began with the First Battle of Bull Run and continued throughout the war. 
 1. Catholic Church 4,673,500 18.59 2. Southern Baptist Convention 3,722,194 14.80 3. Non-Denominational Christian 
 ‘ These existential questions are central to the five major world religions — and 

 id="file23242753" filename="which_systematic_theology_book_should_i_get" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.reddit.com/r/Reformed/comments/rctmv7/which_systematic_theology_book_should_i_get/">
 Press J to jump to the feed. Press question mark to learn the rest of the keyboard shortcuts 
 Which Systematic Theology book should I get? 
 Which Systematic Theology book should I get? 
 I’m currently finishing up on Everyone’s a Theologian by RC Sproul which is a great introductory book into theology. I was recommended Wayne Grudem’s Systematic Theology, and seen really good reviews on Biblical Doctrine by MacArthur. Which is the best for someone new to the faith? 
 But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart. 
 Aside from some of the other works already mentioned, I also recommend Thomas Watson's A Body of Practical Divinity, Robert Shaw's exposition of the Westminster Confession of Faith, the systematic theology of John Brown of Haddington, and Calvin's Institutes. 
 I too will say there are things that Grudem's Theology disagrees with Reformed Theology on, but his Bible Doctrine is a nice intro to Systematic Theology that's approachable. 
 For a really good in depth from a reformed perspective study... you want Pilgrim Theology by Michael Horton. 
 And if you have the time, get R.C. Sproul's Critical Questions books and work through them. Each one covers a single topic and goes in depth together they will help you form your Theology Proper. 
 EDIT: to clarify, Grudem wrote Bible Doctrine as a simplified version of his two part Systematic Theology. 
 I appreciated Hodge, Turretin, Bavinck, Vos, and Smith. 
 For a good starter (clear and deep, but not difficult to read) I recommend Morton Smith's 2 volume work. 
 But before that, read something like Michael Allen's introduction to Reformed Theology. 
 Bavinck, I understand the current hype, but reads more like historical theology at some parts than systematic theology. 
 Michael Allen and Scott Swain have a abridged "ST" called Church Dogmatics. It's alright. 
 Herman Bavinck is an absolute must. If you don't have the time for his 4 volume magnus opus, Reformed Dogmatics, then go for The Wonderful Works of God. 
 Excellent work on Reformed systemic theology that balances readability, conciseness, and depth/nuance, which he wrote with the audience of those who are somewhat knowledgeable in theology and have basic training but may be too busy to invest too much time for deep scholarship in mind. 
 If I were to ever teach a Reformed systematic theology course on an advanced undergraduate or early seminary level, this is probably the textbook I'd choose. 
 Yes! I wish I had scrolled to the bottom before I posted - This is excellent advice! 
 “Bavinck is actually really good on this  (basically every episode of Mere Fidelity!, haha) 
 Highly recommend Robert Letham’s systematic theology, especially for a beginner. Newer and thus less know. It covers a lot and is a rich, filling read. Also gotta mention The Crucifixion by Fleming Rutledge. Not a complete systematic, but the most comprehensive yet accessible work on the cross/atonement that I’ve read. 
 Bavinck, Vos, and Horton are also must haves. Bavinck and Vos both have an abridged single volume systematic. Horton, on top of his systematic theology, has a two volume set on justification that’s worth getting a hold of. 
 The Westminster Standards. Get a volume with the Scripture proofs. Read every proof. The Banner of Truth edition is nice, hides the American revisions in their own section. 
 Grudem is better than you'll gather from in here. His new edition contains a number of retractions from the first. Wayne like to grind his axes. 
 Beeke is *hard core* reformed. He may be the last Puritan. I also like his study bible. 
 Bavinck's Reformed Dogmatics isn't just 4 volumes. It's 4 interminable volumes. Of course, it's all first rate. Mine has a copyright of 2003-2006, but B died in 1921. 
 Berkhof. almost 100 years old now. 
 Geisler. 4 volumes and a condensed 1 volume. I haven't read these. 
 But I would never recommend Van Til to someone who is new. CVT is often times unclear on his own terms, he re-appropriates philosophical language in unhelpful ways, he is caustic and uncharitable to anyone who he is disagreeing with (Romanists, Arminians, Barthians, etc.). I don't think he is a good model for tone, style, and on many of the unique claims he is not a good model for theology. 
 CVT has use but not this. 
 Frame has a lot of what Van Til needed but didn't have. 
 What you could do is browse seminaries that you would theoretically enjoy attending and see which ST they assign. You could also check out Reformed Forum's Suggested Reading List and scroll down to their ST section where they give you reading suggestions for three different reading levels. 
 I will reiterate the advice already given and say to avoid Grudem. Berkhof is great and what's even better is that it has stood the test of time. Also, you will be suprised at how incredibly readable you will find the English translations of Calvin's Institutes to be. 
 Wonderful Works of God by Bavinck, Institutes of the Christian Religion by Calvin, Systematic Theology by Berkhof, Westminster Confession of Faith (+Truths we Confess by Sproul) Great Doctrines of the Bible by Martin Lloyd-Jones, Institutes of Elenctic Theology by Turretin, Reformed Systematic Theology by Beeke, and A Puritan Theology by Beeke and Jones 
 With all these options, for the sake of good theology, please don't use Grudem's Systematic. There's too many good books to read 
 I've read Grudem's book twice in the last three years and have found it very helpful. I don't know how it compares to MacArthur but Grudem isn't 'fully' reformed. When I read the book with my church there were some differences in what we believe, not that I can remember them right now. 
 Although I haven't got it yet (Christmas present) I recommend the three volume set of systematic theology by Charles Hodge. I've become a fan of his work this past month and I can't wait to actually sit down and go through the volumes 
 r/Reformed exists to be a place where reformed believers, in a broader understanding of the term, can come together, unified by a clear Gospel witness, to exhort one another, spur one another on intellectually in reformed theology, and discuss doctrine. 
 We use cookies on our websites for a number of purposes, including analytics and performance, functionality and advertising. Learn more about Reddit’s use of cookies. 

 id="file23242597" filename="why-does-god-bless-people" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.reenactingtheway.com/blog/why-does-god-bless-people">
 Since human life began, people have misunderstood why God blesses us. 
 In the beginning Genesis 1 and 2 describe how the Creator blessed a few people with a beautiful land full of food and animals to enjoy. But those first few people did not enjoy the blessings God gave them in the way God commanded. They wanted to take every blessing from God for themselves. 
 The first humans disobeyed God's order to refrain from one specific tree and lost many blessings as their punishment. But God was gracious. He blessed people with many children and soon the earth was full. 
 People did not handle their newfound abundance well. Genesis 6 says people did not love each other. They did not work hard to provide for their families or care for each person's needs. Their hearts turned inward. They attacked and stole and killed each other to get more of God's blessings for themselves. So God punished them with a great flood. Humanity had failed to respond properly to the blessing of a burgeoning population. 
 In Genesis 10-11 human beings began to form large nations with strong cities and a common language for everyone to speak. The people could have thanked God for their success and shared their blessings with one another. But the leaders decided to build great monuments and towers to show that they were more powerful than the gods. They wanted to create a wonderful world without any great God, only Great people. So they were punished and their power and towers destroyed. 
 That is when the Bible introduces us to a man named Abram. In the land where Abram was born, most people thought gods lived above the sky. They thought the most powerful god was the moon at night and the sun during the day. Nobody knew who the real God was because their ancestors had rejected him and misused God's blessings. But God would not give up. He wanted us to know who he really is and the way we were created to live. So he spoke to Abram with a command and a promise. 
 Now the Lord said to Abram, “Go from your country and your family and your father’s house to the land that I will show you. And I will make a great nation out of you. I will bless you and make your name great so that you will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and him who dishonors you I will curse, and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed.  - Genesis 12:1-3 
 Let me ask you a critical theological question about this moment in time. Why does God promise to bless Abram? Why? What is the purpose? 
 Is it just to make Abram a great man? Is it just to give him a big and powerful family? If we can figure out why God blesses Abram, we will understand the purpose behind every good gift God has given in human history. You see, God did not promise to bless Abram just for Abram's benefit. God did not even interrupt Abram's life just because God wanted to know him. God blessed Abram for a bigger reason. God blessed Abram so that the whole world could know the one true God again. How do I know? Genesis 12:2-3 tell me. 
 In Genesis 12:2 God promises Abram, "I will bless you and make your name great." Then God gives the reason: "so that you will be a blessing." God does not say: "so that your life will be wonderful." God does not say: "so that you will get what you want." He says: "so that you will be a blessing" to others. God repeats that same point in Genesis 12:3. "In you (Abram) all the families on the earth will be blessed." Here is the lesson we must learn: The purpose of blessing Abram is not for Abram to be blessed. Huh? The purpose of blessing Abram is to bring a blessing to everyone else through him. 
 This is God's method for redeeming the world. He gives to one of us so that we will give to others. He shows himself to one of us so that we might show him to others. He teaches us a lesson so that we might teach others. God works through us. If God wants to bring love and forgiveness to the whole world, he shares it with a few people so that they can share that love and forgiveness with others. 
 Biblical Paradigm of Pipelines 
 God's plan to bless people so that they will bless others runs through the entire Bible. It is in the New Testament as well as the Old Testament. Paul commands in Ephesians 4:32, "Forgive one another as God in Christ forgave you." Do you see the pattern? We are forgiven so that we forgive. John relies on the same logic in 1 John 4:19. "We love because he first loved us." What God gives to us, we pass along to others. What we experience in our relationship with God isn't supposed to end with us. God reaches out to us so that he might work through us. 
 This is what we call the pipeline principle. God does not want you to use all your blessings for yourself. He wants you to distribute what you are given. He wants you to be a pipeline that pours out his blessings onto other people not a bucket holding blessings for yourself. So ask yourself this simple question: Are you a bucket or a pipeline? Buckets store the water poured into them. Pipes let the water run through them. Pipes deliver the water to new people and places. 
 In the land of Israel, the Bible talks about a giant lake called the Dead Sea. The Jordan river pours water into it constantly. However, the Dead Sea does not pour out the water into any other streams. The Dead Sea just traps the water like a big bucket. 
 Do you know what that has done to the Dead Sea? Every living thing that enters the Dead Sea dies. There are no fish that can survive. God does not want us to be the Dead Sea. He does not want us to collect fresh water like a bucket and keep it for ourselves. God wants us to share every good blessing we have received like a pipeline sending fresh water to people and places that need it. 
 Like Giving Candy to Kids 
 I do the same thing in my life. I use God's method of sharing blessings when I give candy to my kids. I have 5 children. Sometimes I buy a small bag of candy and want to give one piece to each child. So I give 5 pieces to my oldest son and ask him to give one piece to each of the other children. Most of the time it is a good plan, but sometimes not all the children get a piece of candy. How can that happen? I believe my math is good in that calculation. So if I give 5 pieces of candy to my oldest son, how does every child not get one piece? What goes wrong? 
 If you are a parent, you know what happens. One child has taken more than one piece for themselves. Someone does not pass on the candy they received from their father. We make the same mistake with God's blessings. We use them for ourselves rather than blessing other people with what God has given to us. I believe God would say to us what I say to my children when they do not pass along the candy meant for their siblings: "Stop taking everything I give you for yourself. I only gave it to you so that you could share it with your brothers and sisters!" 
 Abraham's Nation for the Nations 
 Now let's return to the story of Abraham. God did bless Abram as He promised in Genesis. He changed his name from Abram to Abraham to declare he would be a "father of many." Abraham's descendants did become a great nation. The Bible calls that nation Israel. 
 Exodus 19:6 describes Abraham's nation as "a kingdom of priests." In the ancient world where Israel lived, "priests" helped people meet God. Priests brought people into God's presence. Under the leadership of prophets like Moses and kings like David, Abraham's great nation of Israel introduced other nations to the one true God. Abraham's descendants were priests to the ancient world. God blessed the nation of Israel so that they could bless the rest of the world with knowledge of the one true God and how he wanted people to live. When they stopped representing God well, their might crumbled. 
 How Has God Blessed You? 
 Our blessings are different than Abraham's blessing. Creating a great nation out of Abraham's family was a special plan God had for that period in human history. Our children will likely not become a mighty nation whose laws and customs display God's character and identity to the world. God has many other ways to bless us so that we might be a blessing to our world. 
 What blessings has God given you? The blessings you have been given are not what you might expect. You may have been given pain so that you can bring comfort to those who suffer. You may be given poverty so that wealth does not distract you from concern for your neighbor. You may be given a brilliant mind so that you can solve some of the toughest problems in your community. You may have been given loving parents so that you can adopt children into your family and rescue them from neglect and abuse. You may have been given good hands for building and repairing so that you can help a widow when things are broken in her house. You may have been given a gift of leadership so that you can start a business that hires people in your neighborhood who need jobs. You may have experienced God's power so that you can help people break free from the sin that is destroying them and their families. 
 Take one minute and think about what blessings you have been given so that you can bless others. What skills or experiences or resources do you have that could help other people experience the love and wisdom and justice of God? Pray and ask God to show you right now before reading further. 
 Jesus Hates Buckets 
 Jesus believed in the pipeline principle. In Matthew 18, he told a story of a tax officer who was forgiven a great debt he owed a king. After that tax officer had been forgiven, he found another man who owed him a little money and demanded it back. When the second man could not repay the small sum of money to the tax officer, he attacked him and choked him and sent him to jail. The king in Jesus' story hated this hypocrisy. In Matthew 18:33 the king scolds the unforgiving tax officer and says, 'Should you not also have had mercy on your fellow man, in the same way that I had mercy on you?' 
 Do you understand the lesson Jesus taught in this story? Jesus was teaching us: you cannot take God's forgiveness for yourself but refuse to pass it on to others. If God gives you a blessing, then you are expected to share that blessing with others. This is how God works. God does not keep pouring blessings into buckets. His plan is to pour love and mercy into people who act like pipes that pour it out on others who need it. 
 It's Not For You 
 I have travelled to every inhabited continent in the world. One of the greatest deceptions that people believe and teach around the world is that God wants to fill up your bucket with blessings just for you. I call this message the gospel of personal prosperity. 
 Now is it true that God loves to bless his people? Yes. But people have misunderstood the purpose behind God's blessings. It is preached that God wants to make you rich. Millions of people around the world wrongly believe that God wants to end the problems in your life. They have been told God wants to bless you so you can move from poverty to wealth or from pain to happiness. But the purpose of God's blessings aren't just to make your life better. That idea is wrong. Why is it wrong? The gospel of personal prosperity is wrong because it believes you are a bucket collecting blessings for yourself rather than a pipeline passing along what God gives you. 
 Jesus taught in Luke 12:48, "To whom much is given, much is required." If you have been richly blessed, then you have a great responsibility to use it to bless others. So be careful when you pray for God to bless you. Greater blessings entail greater responsibility. 
 The book of James in the Bible warns us about selfish prayers for personal gain. Prayers that ask God to fill our buckets with extra blessings are powerless because they misunderstand why God blesses people. James 4:2-3 says, "You do not have because you do not ask. You ask and do not receive because you ask with the wrong purpose. You just want stuff for yourself." We should ask God for gifts so that we have more to give to others not more for ourselves. That is God's heart. 
 God cares about the whole world not just you. You are part of something much BIGGER than yourself. God wants to use you as a pipeline that pours out his blessing on other people. 
 God's paradigm for blessing the world with his love, forgiveness, and wisdom has been the same since the time of Abraham. God blessed Israel so that they could bless the world with the knowledge of the one true God. God has given us many blessings so that we can do the same. What he pours into us, we must pour out. 
 Filled So You Can Flow Out 
 Earlier I asked you to think about the ways God has blessed you. I want you to think about it again. Has God calmed your fears? Now you can calm the fears of other people. Has God showed you how to create a loving family? Then teach your friends how to be a kind and responsible leader in their family. Has God given you strength and hope to endure suffering? Then comfort your friends who are suffering and help them find strength in Jesus to persevere. Has God given you a position in the government? Then make sure your community upholds justice so people are treated fairly. We have been given many blessings that we forget we have. But remember what Jesus said, "To whom much is given, much is required." 
 If you cannot think of blessings God has given you to share, then ask God for new blessings so you can pass them along to people you meet. This is God's plan for blessing the world with an understanding of who he is and how he wants us to live. We must be continually filled by God so that it can flow out to other people. 
 Now may God's promise to Abraham become your experience. Be blessed so that you can be a blessing to others. 
 I really wish that he could've blessed me with a wife and family that i still Don't have today, and he has Blessed so many other men with that gift. God what about us good single men out there that would've wanted that gift too? 
 1/5/2016 06:01:01 pm 
 Reply 
 Many people were very blessed in life by God. Just ask that couple that just celebrated their 81st year together. 
 Reply 
 Emile 
 11/27/2017 03:15:43 am 
 Thanks for the article, its an eye opening. God bless you Sir 
 God additionally favors the person who doesn't stroll in sync with the underhanded or hold up traffic that delinquents take (Psalm 1:1). Consequently, on the off chance that you disregard underhanded ways and reject devilish demonstrations, favors will be bountiful in your life. 
 Reply 
 Leave a Reply. 
 BUY the BOOK 
 Author 
 Paul Penley's training as a Bible scholar, life as a human being, and work as a philanthropic advisor overflows into this blog 

 id="file23242739" filename="why-i-am-not-a-calvinist-jesse-morrell" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://biblicaltruthresources.wordpress.com/2013/07/30/why-i-am-not-a-calvinist-jesse-morrell/">
 I am giving away a free copy of the classic book, “Objections to Calvinism As It Is  by Randolph Foster! I pray that this blesses your life. 
 You’ll also receive in the same email two other theological books that I won’t name, just to spark your curiosity some more.😉 
 And lastly, you’ll also be subscribed to our free email newsletter and will receive biblical articles and great content from time to time. 
 Calvinism, also known as Reformed Theology or the so called “Doctrines of Grace,  has had some resurgence in recent years. This has deeply disturbed and troubled me as Calvinism is a very heretical and dangerous theology that believers can be deceived into. Still, many believers have never even heard of Calvinism.For that reason, I find it necessary to post what it is that Calvinism teaches and how these false doctrines are in contradiction to the Holy Scriptures. 
 These are some of the major theological problems with Calvinism: 
 1. Calvinism denies man’s free will to obey or disobey God, which is the basis of man’s responsibility and accountability, as taught by the Bible: (Gen. 4:6-7; Deut. 11:26-28; 30:11-15, 19; Josh. 24:15; Jer. 38:20; Eze. 18:30; Acts 17:30-31); 
 Augustine said, “By Adam’s transgression, the freedom of’ the human will has been completely lost.  
 Augustine said, “By the greatness of the first sin, we have lost the freewill to love God.  
 Augustine said, “by subverting the rectitude in which he was created, he is followed with the punishment of not being able to do right  and “the freedom to abstain from sin has been lost as a punishment of sin.  
 Martin Luther said that “the law demands of men what they cannot do…  
 Martin Luther said, “For if man has lost his freedom, and is forced to serve sin, and cannot will good, what conclusion can more justly be drawn concerning him, than that he sins and wills evil necessarily?  
 2. Calvinism denies that each individual is responsible and accountable for their own sins committed in their own life, and will not be damned for the sins of anyone else, as the Bible teaches: (Lev. 18:29; Deut. 24:16; 2 Kng. 14:6; 2 Chron. 25:4; Eze. 18:2-6; Eze. 18:20; Jer. 17:10; Matt. 16:27; Rom. 2:5-6; Rom. 14:12; 2 Cor. 5:10; 2 Cor. 11:15; 1 Pet. 1:17; Rev. 20:11-12; Rev. 22:12); 
 John Calvin stated, “Adam drew all his posterity with himself, by his fall, into eternal damnation.  
 3. Calvinism denies that Christ died for everyone (Heb. 2:9; 2 Cor. 5:14-15; 1 Jn. 2:2), and His unlimited atonement does not make salvation automatic for anyone, but available for everyone (Jn. 3:14-17; 12:46; Acts 10:43; Rom. 10:11; Rev. 22:17), and that those for whom Christ died can still perish (Rom. 14:15; 1 Cor. 8:11; 2 Pet. 2:1); as the Bible teaches. 
 Custance said, “No man can be held accountable for a debt that has already been paid for on his behalf to the satisfaction of the offended party. But a double jeopardy, a duplication of indebtedness, is indeed involved if the non-elect are to be punished for sins which the Lord Jesus Christ has already endured punishment.  
 Boettner said, “For God to have laid the sins of all men on Christ would mean that as regards to the lost He would be punishing their sins twice, once in Christ, and then again in them.  
 Wayne Grudem said, “Reformed people argue that if Christ’s death actually paid for the sins of every person who ever lived, then there is no penalty left for anyone to pay, and it necessarily follows that all people will be saved, without exception. For God could not condemn to eternal punishment anyone whose sins are already paid for: that would be demanding double payment, and it would therefore be unjust.  
 Joshua Williamson said, “If Christ died for everyone, everyone would be saved.  
 4. Calvinism denies the universal benevolence or love of God, which wants all sinners to repent and be saved as taught by the Bible: (Eze. 33:11; John 3:14-17; 2 Pet. 3:19); 
 John Calvin said, “not only was the destruction of the ungodly foreknown, but the ungodly themselves have been created for the specific purpose of perishing.  
 John Calvin said, “First, the eternal predestination of God, by which before the fall of Adam He decreed what should take place concerning the whole human race and every individual, was fixed and determined.  
 John Calvin said, “At this point in particular the flesh rages when it hears that the predestination to death of those who perish is referred to the will of God.  
 Alan Kurschner said, “God desires that his sheep are saved. God desires that his people are saved. He does not desire that every single individual who has ever lived, live in glory with him forever. If that were the case, we have an incompetent, unhappy, and impotent God.  
 Matthew McMahon said, “I reject anything which makes God a cosmic bell-hop tending to the commands and demands of sinful men as another gospel. I reject anything which removes God’s sovereignty to place man as the Sovereign as another gospel. I reject anything which denies the sovereign decrees of God and His electing grace to put salvation into the hands of sinful men as another gospel. I reject anything which denies man’s total depravity and exalts his fictitious free will as another gospel. I reject anything which places the perseverance of man to glory in the incapable hands of a sinful man as another gospel. I reject anything which endeavors to treat God as the great Grandfather in the sky beckoning and pleading with man to be saved as changing the true God into a pitiable wimp.  
 Erwin Lutzer said, “The revealed will was that all men be saved, but the hidden will was that the greater part of mankind be damned.  
 John Calvin said, “His secret counsel, by which He determined to convert none but His elect.  
 John MacArthur, comments: “His patience is not so He can save all of them, but so that He can receive all of His own…  
 5. Calvinism denies the conditional security of believers or the possibility of falling away from the faith as taught by the Bible (Matt. 24:13; Jn. 15:6; Acts 11:23; Acts 13:43; Acts 14:22; Rom. 8:13; Rom. 11:20-21; 1 Cor. 9:27; Heb. 2:1-3; Heb. 10:26-31; 2 Pet. 2:20-21); 
 Martin Luther said, “Be a sinner and sin boldly… No sin can separate us from Him, even if we were to kill or commit adultery thousands of times each day.  
 Westminster Confession of Faith said, “They whom God hath accepted in His Beloved, effectually called and sanctified by his Spirit, can neither totally nor finally fall away from the state of grace; but shall certainly persevere therein to the end, and be eternally saved.  
 6. Calvinism denies man’s role, responsibility, and choice to cooperate with God in regeneration or in the changing of his heart as taught by the Bible (Deut. 10:16; Eze. 18:30-32; Ps. 78:8; Ps. 95:8; Heb. 3:15; Act 7:51; 17:30-31; Jas. 4:8; Col. 3:9-10; Eph. 4:22, 24; 1 Tim. 4:16); 
 Martin Luther said, “I say that man… when he is re-created does and endeavors nothing towards his perseverance in that kingdom; but the Spirit alone works both blessings in us, regenerating us, and preserving us when regenerate, without ourselves…  
 A. W. Pink said, “The new birth is solely the work of God the Spirit and man has no part in it.  
 7. Calvinism denies that there is deliverance available from all sin in Jesus Christ, or the possibility of overcoming sin in this life by the grace of God as taught by the Bible (Matt. 1:21; Jn. 8:36; Rom. 6:18, 20, 22; 8:2; 1 Cor. 10:13; 1 Thes. 3:13; 1 Thes. 5:23; Titus 2:11-12; Jude 1:24; 1 Tim. 6:14; 1 Jn. 1:9; 3:9). 
 The Westminster Catechism says, “No man is able, either of himself, or by any grace received in this life, perfectly to keep the commandments of God; but does daily break them in word, thought, and deed.  
 8. Calvinism denies that man’s choice to repent of all his sins is a necessary condition of forgiveness, but rather teaches that justification by grace through faith is nothing more than justification in sin and impenitence (Antinomianism), as opposed to what the Bible teaches: (Isa. 55:7; Eze. 18:30; Prov. 28:13; Matt. 7:21; 19:17; Lk. 13:3; Acts 8:22; Rom. 2:5; 6:1-2; Titus 2:1112; Jude 1:4; Rev. 22:14). 
 Charles Spurgeon said, “You must not expect that you will be perfect in ‘repentance’ before you are saved. No Christian can be perfect. “Repentance  is a grace. Some people preach it as a condition of salvation. Condition of nonsense! There are no conditions of salvation. God gives the salvation himself…  
 Harry Ironside said, “The Gospel is not a call to repentance, or to amendment of our ways, to make restitution for past sins, or to promise to do better in the future. These things are proper in their place, but they do not constitute the Gospel; for the Gospel is not good advice to be obeyed, it is good news to be believed. Do not make the mistake then of thinking that the Gospel is a call to duty or a call to reformation, a call to better your condition, to behave yourself in a more perfect way than you have been doing in the past … Nor is the Gospel a demand that you give up the world, that you give up your sins, that you break off bad habits, and try to cultivate good ones. You may do all these things, and yet never believe the Gospel and consequently never be saved at all.  
 9. Calvinism denies that God is not the author of sin, nor the sovereign cause of its entrance into the world, as taught by the Bible (Gen. 1:31; 6:5-6; 1 Sam. 15:22; Jer. 19:5, 32:35; Isa. 5:4; Zeph. 3:5; Ecc. 7:29; Matt. 6:10; Lk. 7:30; 1 Cor. 14:33; Heb. 1:9, James 1:13). 
 Martin Luther said, “Since, therefore, God moves and does all in all, He necessarily moves and does all in Satan and the wicked man…  
 Martin Luther said, “God worketh all things in all men even wickedness in the wicked…  
 John Calvin said, “Whatever things are done wrongly and unjustly by man, these very things are the right and just works of God.  
 There are many other orthodox doctrines which are taught in the Scriptures and which were held by all of the Early Church which are denied by Augustinian and Reformed Theology, but the above is sufficient for this article. 
 As much as Calvinism claims to be orthodox, its doctrines are utterly opposed to the doctrines of the Early Church Fathers before Augustine, and they have more in common with the heretical teachings of the Gnostics and Manicheans. 
 Sadly, many Calvinist groups function as a cult today, claiming exclusively that Calvinism is Christianity, that their doctrine of T.U.L.I.P. is the gospel itself, and that anyone who disagrees with their doctrine is a “heretic,  “false teacher,  or “false convert.  They are quick to break fellowship with, and falsely accuse, any Christian that contradicts their own theology. 
 I have always found it interesting that these groups will hail John Calvin as a hero, but will label Charles Finney a heretic. Charles Finney was America’s greatest revivalist, who lead a quarter of a million people to the Lord. The vast majority of his converts stayed in the faith until their dying day, unlike other evangelists like D. L. Moody or Billy Graham, who’s converts mostly fell away. John Calvin on the other hand had excommunicated and even killed countless individuals. Calvinists overlook this and often seek to justify it, while they are quick to condemn Finney because he used “altar calls.  I can supply story after story of Finney winning sinners to Christ, but Calvinists have been unable to provide for me even a single story of John Calvin ever personally leading a sinner to Jesus. There are plenty of stories of John Calvin burning sinners at the stake, but not a single one of him leading souls to Christ like Charles Finney did. Yet, they exalt Calvin as a hero and criticize Finney for calling sinners to repentance at the altar. 
 FREE BOOK 
 I am giving away a free copy of the classic book, “Objections to Calvinism As It Is  by Randolph Foster! I pray that this blesses your life. 
 You’ll also receive in the same email two other theological books that I won’t name, just to spark your curiosity some more.😉 
 And lastly, you’ll also be subscribed to our free email newsletter and will receive biblical articles and great content from time to time. 
 11 Responses to Why I Am Not A Calvinist: How Reformed Theology Contradicts Scripture – Jesse Morrell 
 Calvinism is dangerous in its effect for many reasons. First of all, if you cannot help but to live in perpetual sin, why even try to be perfect? Second, if God doesn’t want everyone to be saved, why should you? Third, if Jesus didn’t die for everyone, you cannot tell people on the street that Jesus died for them. Fourth, if God doesn’t want everyone to repent, you cannot tell sinners that God wants them to repent. Fifth, if sinners had no free will but were forced by their nature to sin, how could you truly blame them for their sin and bring about the conviction necessary for their salvation? Sixth, how can you justify God in apologetic to the world when your theology makes Him the eternal author of all sin? And seventh, if salvation is not man’s free will choice but is predestined and monergistic, then the salvation of others does not truly depend upon you – making void the great commission. In fact, if regeneration were constitutional because free will was lost by original sin, and not a moral change, then God could regenerate a sinner by the snap of his finger with absolutely no need of the gospel itself. 
 The simply fact that Calvinism denies essentials of the gospel, like the unlimited atonement of Christ and God’s will for all to be saved, makes it’s doctrines heretical. Calvinists say that Calvinism is the gospel itself, but in reality, Calvinism is a denial of the gospel itself. 
 I met a Calvinist who told me that she didn’t want everyone to repent and be saved because, after all, God doesn’t. So Calvinism results in men not loving their neighbor as themselves. Thus this tradition of men makes void the commandment of God. 
 perhaps the best points ive heard yet. I grew up in a heretical southern baptist “church ……very good discernment you have…. 
 its strange how men will attend a theological “cemetary  school, and get a degree in “divinity  or theology, and know absolutely NOTHING about the oracles of God. They rely on their sheep clothing to manipulate Scripture into an idol religion, custom made for the ears of those that seek ointment for the itch…..once saved always saved is a lie from hell. What did JESUS say? what did the PROPHETS say? what did JOHN, PETER, and PAUL say? men who were completely filled and controlled by the Holy Spirit, as they GAVE THEMSELVES AS SLAVES TO Christ. 
 Your comment is proof positive that seminaries and schooling are vital to our walk with Him. Without it, un-biblical and flawed teachings abound just like what you posted and what this entire website professes. I am a 0 point Calvinist but consider Calvinist closer to the truth than anything taught on the website. 
 Just try to show this to a baptist, calvinist preacher, and watch as they try to explain it away, making themselves the people who John was speaking of to watch and avoid… 
 1 John 2 King James Version (KJV) 2 My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous:2 And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.3 And hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandments.4 He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.5 But whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected: hereby know we that we are in him.6 He that saith he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked.7 Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you, but an old commandment which ye had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word which ye have heard from the beginning.8 Again, a new commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in him and in you: because the darkness is past, and the true light now shineth.9 He that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in darkness even until now. 10 He that loveth his brother abideth in the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him.11 But he that hateth his brother is in darkness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because that darkness hath blinded his eyes.12 I write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven you for his name’s sake.13 I write unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning. I write unto you, young men, because ye have overcome the wicked one. I write unto you, little children, because ye have known the Father.14 I have written unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning. I have written unto you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one.15 Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.16 For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.17 And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.18 Little children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time. 19 They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.20 But ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things.21 I have not written unto you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth.22 Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist, that denieth the Father and the Son 23 Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father: he that acknowledgeth the Son hath the Father also.24 Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father.25 And this is the promise that he hath promised us, even eternal life. 26 These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you. 
 I agree with all you say. Calvin followers twist scripture in order to fit it in with filtered doctrine. All scripture has to be forced into the shape ordained by Calvin the Protestant Pope as he once was know by. 
 The doctrine that God forgives us without repentance unto holiness or while we continue in our sinning, which is nothing more than a license to sin, is certainly not “good news  to the universe as it completely endangers and threatens the public’s well-being. Sin is a violation of rights of the public and therefore forgiveness without repentance cannot be good news to the public. 
 Also, the doctrine of a limited atonement is only “good news  to a selfish mind who believes he is part of the elect. But if the atonement was limited and not for all, then there is no good news for “every creature.  
 Thus, Calvinism is not the gospel as they allege, rather, Calvinism is a denial of the gospel. 
 How does Ezekiel 33:6 make sense in light of a Calvinist view? But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned; if the sword come, and take any person from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at the watchman’s hand. 
 Why would the watchman need to go warn the person and so what if he did, if that person being warned had no choice in if he would remain in sin or not? Doesn’t the statement that once the warning is given, the blood would be on the person’s own hands if they did not repent and not on the hands of the watchman disprove Calvinistic thought? 
 Calvinism grieves my heart and it disturbs me to see so many Calvinistic posts on Facebook and Calvinistic materials and preachers being so popular in our day. 
 Scriptural problems I have with Calvinism: 
 1. Calvinism says that God decreed all sin when the Bible says sin breaks the heart of God and wills holiness and obedience from His subjects. 
 2. Calvinism says that men are under the wrath of God for the sin of Adam when the Bible says that the son does not bear the iniquity of the father and we will all give an account for our own deeds. 
 3. Calvinism says that man’s free will was lost by Adam’s original sin when the Bible never says this but instead continues to appeal to man’s free moral agency after Adam’s fall. 
 4. Calvinism says that all men inherit a sinful nature from Adam when the Bible never even says that Adam’s nature was sinful but instead asserts that God forms our nature in the womb. 
 5. Calvinism says that all events are the eternal will of God when the Bible represents God as grieved, disappointed, and surprised over many events that have occurred. 
 6. Calvinism says that God has irresistibly decreed all events from eternity past, when the Bible says that God has canceled and reversed some of His own prophecies and teaches that the future is not yet entirely fixed and settled. 
 7. Calvinism says that God has given man a moral law which He is incapable of keeping when the Bible says that God is just, never allows us to be tempted above our ability, and only obligates us to love Him with all of our ability. 
 8. Calvinism says that Jesus Christ came and took our punishment when the Bible says that our punishment is eternal hell. 
 9. Calvinism says that Jesus Christ came and paid our debt when the Bible says that God forgives us our debt. 
 10. Calvinism says that Jesus Christ took the punishment of our sins when the Bible says that God forgives us our sins. 
 11. Calvinism says that Jesus Christ came and took the wrath of God when the Bible says that God still has wrath after the atonement, that sinners are not saved from God’s wrath until conversion, that the atonement was instead a justification of His mercy, and that believers who return to their sins return to the wrath of God. 
 12. Calvinism says that Jesus Christ became sinful and guilty on the cross when the Bible says He died the just for the unjust and offered Himself without spot or blemish to God. 
 13. Calvinism says that those for whom Christ died can never perish when the Bible warns that those for whom Christ died can perish. 
 14. Calvinism says that Christ only died for a few elect when the Bible says that Jesus died for the world and all men. 
 15. Calvinism says that God wants most sinners to remain in their sins and die and go to hell, to somehow glorify His justice, when the Bible says God wants all men to repent and be saved. 
 16. Calvinism says that men cannot repent and believe when the Bible commands men to repent and believe and blames them if they do not. 
 17. Calvinism says that men cannot repent and believe because they are born spiritually dead because of Adam when the Bible says that men are dead or alienated from God because of their own trespasses and sins and says the prodigal son was able to return to the father even though he was dead to the father. 
 18. Calvinism says that God predestined individuals for heaven or hell when the Bible says that God has chosen to offer salvation to the Jews and the Gentiles, grafting in some and cutting off others based upon their faith or unbelief. 
 19. Calvinism says that God predestined some for Heaven and most for hell according to the pleasure of His will, when the Bible says that God sent Jesus to die for all, commands all men to repent and believe, is drawing all men unto Himself, is not willing that any should perish, and takes no pleasure in the death of the wicked. 
 20. Calvinism says that the righteousness of Christ is imputed to believers when the Bible says that our faith is imputed as righteousness. 
 21. Calvinism says that God doesn’t see believers if they sin, but see’s imputed righteousness instead, when the Bible says God is omniscient and nothing is hide from His eyes. 
 22. Calvinism says that true believers will persevere unto the end when the Bible exhorts believers to persevere, warns of damnation if they do not, and speaks of some who have departed from the faith. 
 My list can go on and on but these are just some of the major points 
 Shalom! God bless you! I want this book. I am from Romania and in Romania are many calvinists. I am not calvinist and I can’t stand that demonic doctrine. Also I descovered that calvinists are very agressive. I don’t understand how this people preach that God is a calvinist when the Bible is very clear. Well…when you can’t accept the truth of God, you’ll twist it to conform to your self ideas about who God is. Please, send me this book to read it and to continue to destroy the calvinism with the PURE Word of God. Thank you very much, brother! Keep preaching. 
 Please keep in mind that St. Augustine said much more than you mention in this article. He is one of the go-to Church Fathers used by Protestants to suggest that the early Church was actually Protestant in doctrine and practices. St. Augustine, however, is absolutely orthodox in his Catholic teaching. These comments are being seen in isolation and do not, by any means, represent his fully fleshed out writings. 
 Blog Stats 
 462,971 hits 
 Follow Blog via Email 
 Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email. 
 Send Missionary Support 
 How to Refute Atheism & Evolution – FREE BOOK 
 Preaching Shirts! 
 Get Jesse Morrell’s Book “Cleansing the Temple: A Call to Radical Christianity.  
 Get Jesse Morrell’s Book on Free Will & Human Nature 
 Get Jesse Morrell’s Book on Human Nature 
 Get Jesse Morrell’s Book on The Emotions of God 
 Beyond Augustine Church History Documentary DVD 
 The Perfect DVD to give to your Calvinist Friends To Convert them to Free Will Doctrine! 

 id="file23242731" filename="why-so-many-americans-think-theyre-blessed-54939" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://theconversation.com/why-so-many-americans-think-theyre-blessed-54939">
 Why so many Americans think they’re #blessed 
 Author 
 Assistant Professor of Religious Studies, Texas State University 
 Disclosure statement 
 Joseph P. Laycock does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding from any company or organisation that would benefit from this article, and has disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond their academic appointment. 
 Bowler recently wrote a book – Blessed: A History of the American Prosperity Gospel – that has been hailed as the first monograph tracing the history of the prosperity gospel in America. The prosperity gospel, Bowler explains, is “the belief that God grants health and wealth to those with the right kind of faith.  
 Bowler recalls how the prosperity gospel transformed the Mennonite farming community in Manitoba where she grew up. When the community’s pastor showed off the motorcycle he received for “pastor’s appreciation day,  it signaled a new religious attitude about material wealth. She describes explaining this change as her “intellectual obsession.  
 The experience of fighting cancer, however, gave her fresh insight to this obsession: can the prosperity gospel make sense of radical and senseless tragedy? Or does its theology rob us of the opportunity to come to terms with our suffering? 
 Today, America seems divided between those who engage with some version of the prosperity gospel and those who smugly dismiss it as fraudulent and puerile. While there are a number of problems with the gospel, it’s important to look at why this strand of religious thinking evolved in the first place, and why it persists. 
 A right to wealth and health 
 The prosperity gospel is based on a simple premise: God wants us to live “in abundance.  But in order to receive the gifts we are promised, we must demonstrate faith and claim the prosperity that is rightfully ours. 
 Even if many Americans have never heard the term, most are familiar with images of oft-satirized televangelists shaking down their viewers for donations in return for blessings. 
 The prosperity gospel has also been used to explain good health and even good luck. 
 After a string of lethal tornadoes moved though Texas in December 2015, a survivor named Sabrina Lowe claimed that God had given her authority over the winds – and that her family had “commanded  the tornado to move elsewhere. 
 Lowe’s narrative strangely inverted feelings of survivor’s guilt that often follow natural disasters. Instead, she claimed agency and credit for her good fortune. Like the televangelist’s promise of financial blessings in exchange for “seed  donations, the idea of commanding immunity from natural disasters is also a manifestation of prosperity gospel theology. 
 Bowler’s work has shown that the prosperity gospel is much more embedded within American culture than these spectacular examples might suggest. 
 The origins of the prosperity gospel date back to a 19th-century movement called New Thought, which asserted that health and fortune can be achieved through positive thinking. New Thought never went out of fashion: it survives today in books like The Secret, which promises financial success and physical health to those who think positively. The book has sold more than 19 million copies. 
 Bowler credits the early 20th-century pastor E.W. Kenyon with creating a new theology that blended New Thought with the idea that the Bible promises Christians a “legal right  to prosperity. After World War II, the prosperity gospel was spread by popular evangelists like Oral Roberts and became associated with Pentecostalism and televangelism. 
 While relatively few congregations define themselves as preachers of the “prosperity gospel,  elements of the theology saturate American culture. 
 Controversial televangelist Joel Osteen claims that he “shuns  the prosperity gospel label, but still asserts that those who are “blessed  can expect financial rewards along with healthy families and peace of mind. Talk show hostess Oprah Winfrey has been accused of promoting prosperity gospel thinking by pushing inspirational messages to her audience that emphasize the benefits of a positive attitude. Instagram photos and tweets marked with the hashtag “#blessed  populate social media feeds. 
 Meanwhile, politicians will often claim that America’s prosperity is a direct result of God’s blessing. 
 Beyond the United States, the prosperity gospel is now spreading rapidly to countries like Brazil and Nigeria. In fact, Nigeria is now home to some of the wealthiest pastors on the planet – which, from the perspective of the prosperity gospel, is an accomplishment to be proud of. 
 Holy hypocrites? 
 Criticizing the prosperity gospel is arguably as American as the prosperity gospel itself. 
 Theologians have denounced its denial of the reality of suffering. Religious scholar Reza Aslan has called prosperity gospel preachers “charlatans,  and the Lausanne Movement, a group cofounded by Billy Graham, has accused them of “gravely distorting the Bible.  
 In a 2015 editorial for Time, Kareem Abdul Jabar called the prosperity gospel “war on the poor,  arguing that it works like the lottery, exploiting the hopes of the poor and desperate. Journalist Sarah Posner writes that the movement equates capitalist ideology with Christianity in order recruit the poor as foot soldiers for a conservative culture war. 
 While liberals associate the prosperity gospel with conservative Christianity, it also has critics on the right. In 2010, Iowa Republican Senator Chuck Grassley launched an investigation into six televangelists who have been known to preach the prosperity gospel. After more than three years, Grassley’s investigation failed to discover any evidence of wrongdoing or impose any penalties. 
 Other investigations have exposed the gospel’s capacity for duplicity. 
 In 1991, ABC’s “PrimeTime Live  featured a devastating expose of Robert Tilton, a televangelist who mailed handprint tracings, packets of “holy oil  and other mementos to his donors. He encouraged recipients to write their needs on these objects and mail them back with donations so that Tilton’s ministry could ensure their prayers are answered. “PrimeTime Live  discovered the donations went directly to a bank for deposit. 
 In the dumpster behind the bank their team found sacks of unread mail from believers desperate for help. 
 Painful certainty 
 But rather than further eviscerate the prosperity gospel, Bowler’s study attempts to render this movement understandable. 
 Drawing from her ethnographic research in prosperity gospel churches, she shows how this movement is not simply about “praying yourself rich,  but is instead a “comprehensive approach to the human condition.  
 Far from lazily hoping that God would somehow fix all their problems, Bowler found that the prosperity gospel requires practitioners to cultivate an intense mental discipline in order to constantly suppress thoughts of negativity or doubt. 
 The idea of the prosperity gospel as a system for controlling one’s thoughts may explain its popularity in a country where 18 percent of adults suffer from anxiety disorders. Americans spend an estimated US$42 billion a year treating these disorders. 
 Bowler’s findings suggest that one reason for the prosperity gospel’s popularity is that it serves a function similar to therapy or medication. With some discipline, it may, in fact, be possible to feel “too blessed to be stressed.  
 Even though historians of religion are trained to avoid making normative claims about how religions should be practiced, several reviews of Blessed were critical of Bowler’s sympathetic portrayal of the prosperity gospel. They felt she had downplayed the outrages of figures like Tilton. Some even called her an apologist. 
 But in her editorial, Bowler is able to speak with a more personal voice. She offers some wise critiques of the prosperity gospel and the broader project of finding meaning in human suffering. 
 Emphasizing her perspective as a Christian, as well as a historian, she writes: 
 The prosperity gospel has taken a religion based on the contemplation of a dying man and stripped it of its call to surrender all. Perhaps worse, it has replaced Christian faith with the most painful forms of certainty. The movement has perfected a rarefied form of America’s addiction to self-rule, which denies much of our humanity: our fragile bodies, our finitude, our need to stare down our deaths (at least once in a while) and be filled with dread and wonder. At some point, we must say to ourselves, I’m going to need to let go. 
 In other words, while the prosperity gospel clearly “works  for its believers, its benefits come with a price. The promise that we can have whatever we want leaves us ill-equipped to confront the realities of death and suffering. 
 Tragedy becomes much harder to deal with when we are conditioned to think of ourselves as “blessed.  

 id="file23242816" filename="why-were-glad-our-publisher-isnt-backing-this-bible" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://religionunplugged.com/news/2021/5/25/why-were-glad-our-publisher-isnt-backing-this-bible">
 Why we’re glad our publisher isn’t backing the ‘God Bless the USA’ Bible 
 Religion Unplugged believes in a diversity of well-reasoned and well-researched opinions. This piece reflects the views of the author and does not necessarily represent those of Religion Unplugged, its staff and contributors. 
 (OPINION) There are some seismic shifts happening among evangelical Christians in post-Trump America. The latest is the creation of a “God Bless the USA Bible  that would have melded America’s founding documents with the best-selling NIV Bible translation, licensed in North America by HarperCollins Christian Publishing Inc. 
 As authors published by Zondervan, a division of HarperCollins Christian Publishing known for its NIV Bibles, and activists against Christian nationalism, we were alarmed at this news, first reported by Religion Unplugged. We’re delighted today that Zondervan announced it will not support this Bible. 
 The growing specter of Christian nationalism 
 From our screens, we watched the rioters on Jan. 6 storm the Capitol. We can’t unsee the Jesus signs next to Trump signs, the Confederate flag paraded, the broken windows, injured bodies and officers assaulted. What some of us remember most are the prayers rioters prayed in the Senate chamber “in the name of Jesus,  including the now recognizable QAnon shaman who wore Viking headgear and publicly thanked God for helping rioters take over the Capitol. 
 After that day, hundreds of evangelicals, pastors, authors and faith leaders began to mobilize. We started texting and calling everyone we could, especially friends who transcend partisan politics and are committed to Jesus and the common good. We jumped on Zoom calls with some of the most influential evangelicals in the country. 
 Before long we had a movement of evangelical Christians denouncing what happened on Jan. 6 – as well as, and this is important, the conditions and theology that led up to the events on Jan. 6. Over 5,000 pastors, faith leaders, bishops and authors signed on. And that was just the beginning. The momentum has continued to build, as evidenced in new websites like www.SayNoToChristianNationalism.org and www.LamentingChristianNationalism.org. 
 Last week, some three months after the original petition launched, six different organizations, all led by people of color, organized a week of action to respond to White supremacy and “Christian  nationalism… and the ways that racism tries to camouflage itself as Christianity. 
 It was during this week of action that we learned about the “God Bless the USA Bible.  It’s advertised as: “The ultimate American Bible. The Bible and the founding documents of America. Now… together in one very unique Bible.  
 As Christians around the country organized to address “Christian  nationalism, we heard about this new Bible, with the American flag on the front cover. It features the text of the U.S. Constitution, the Bill of Rights, the Declaration of Independence, the Pledge of Allegiance and the words to the song, “God Bless the USA.  It’s available for pre-sale on their website for $49.99 and releases in September, the 20th anniversary of the 9/11 attacks. 
 There are many versions of the Bible and many translations. There is the “Justice  Bible and the “Green  Bible that emphasize the consistent themes in the text that we are to care for the poor and for the earth. There is even a military edition of the Bible, wrapped in camouflage. This is not the first time there has been an attempt to fuse American nationalism with the holy book – in fact Thomas Nelson released “The American Patriot’s Bible  over a decade ago, which was a very similar project. 
 But what is new is a growing awareness of how dangerous nationalism is when coupled with faith. 
 American nationalism is its own civil religion, where America rather than Jesus is the center of attention. Instead of Jesus and the Church being the light of the world and the hope for humanity, America becomes the Messianic force in the world. Like any religion it has its own liturgy, saints and holidays. These symbols are on full display in this new Bible – the eagle, the flag, the red, white and blue. America’s civil religion has its own creeds too in the new Bible – “We hold these truths to be self-evident…  It has its own “worship  songs – like “God Bless the USA  and “I’m Proud to be an American,  both by Lee Greenwood. It has its own theology – manifest destiny, the doctrine of discovery and American exceptionalism. And this is precisely why it is dangerous to mesh patriotism with orthodox Christian faith. 
 After all, the Bible does not say “God bless America.  It says, “God so loved the world.  The national anthem should not be in the church hymnal, and the Pledge of Allegiance to the United States should not be in the Bible. 
 There are 66 books in the Bible. Some streams of Christian faith include 14 others, known as the “apocrypha.  But no version of orthodox faith has an American apocrypha. Including the founding documents of America and the theology of American nationalism in the Bible is offensive. We do not need an “American apocrypha.  (And there is a verse in the book of Revelation that says: “I warn everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this scroll: If anyone adds anything to them, God will add to that person the plagues described in this scroll. ) 
 “We noticed the divide in the public where some people started seeing pro-American images like the flag, the bald eagle, the statue of liberty as weaponized tools of the Republican party, and we didn’t understand that… We started seeing statutes coming down and we started seeing history for good or bad trying to be erased… That’s when we started thinking, okay how far does this erasing of history go? Love it or hate it, it’s history. But how far does it go?... We’ve never heard of anyone throwing a Bible away. It’s always prominent somewhere in the house, it’s either on the coffee table, it’s somewhere that’s accessible. So if the Bible contained holy scripture but it also contained these documents it would be a one-stop shop for people to learn the basics of why the founders built into those documents divine providence.  
 This customized Bible is a reminder that the “Christian industry  must do better to stand against the heretical and deadly “Christian  nationalism that we saw on full display on Jan. 6. It is like a spiritual virus, infecting our churches, homes and social institutions. Just as we take intentional actions to stop the spread of COVID, like wearing masks and staying six feet apart, we must take concrete steps to stop the spread of this theological virus. 
 How can we better guard the Bible? 
 As authors who have written multiple books for Zondervan, we reached out to the people we know and love at the publishing house. Some of our contacts at Zondervan did not know about the new Bible at all until last week. Others explained how difficult it is to micromanage every project that wants to print the NIV version of the Bible. It is a common if not well known practice for publishers who hold the rights to Bible translations to print customized versions of the Bible for organizations and special projects. 
 We recognize that it is a daunting responsibility to be the guardians of the Bible or to hold a copyright to the “Word of God.  It is also a daunting responsibility to steward money made from over 450 million copies of the NIV sold worldwide. The business of Bibles raises questions about how corporate America collides with the revolutionary movement of Jesus of Nazareth. After all, Rupert Murdoch now owns HarperCollins, Zondervan and as of 2012, Thomas Nelson, which published the so-called Patriot’s Bible in 2009 that is still available at many retailers. For many of us, learning the fact that the man who owns Fox News also owns the company that is the gatekeeper to one of the most popular translations of the Bible is a bit shocking, even concerning. But that fact is beyond the scope of this article. 
 We are authors, but we are also activists. So when we heard about the “God Bless the USA Bible  and the potential it has to fuel the already hot flames of Christian nationalism, we couldn’t help but respond. We also wanted to do that in a way that is respectful, not just reactionary, and in a way that might actually make a difference. 
 We are delighted to hear that Zondervan has released a statement today that affirmed this Bible is not their product. They will not be publishing, manufacturing or selling the Bible. They were approached with the product, but it was not something they decided to support. All the marketing on the “God Bless the USA Bible  website was premature. It is entirely possible that the folks crafting this Bible will find another translation with another publishing house, but for now it is on hold, and we rejoice. We hope that future projects like this one will be reconsidered as well. 
 We don’t need to add anything to the Bible. We just need to live out what it already says. 
 And if we are to be good Christians, we may not always be the best Americans. The beatitudes of Jesus where he blesses the poor, the meek, the merciful, the peacemakers – can feel very different from the “beatitudes  of America. Our money may say in God we trust, but our economy often looks like the seven deadly sins. For Christians, our loyalty is to Jesus. That is who we pledge allegiance to. As the old hymn goes – “My hope is built on nothing less than Jesus’ blood and righteousness/ On Christ the solid rock I stand, all other ground is sinking sand.  Our hope is not in the donkey of the Democrats or the elephant of the GOP… or even in America. 
 Our hope is in the Lamb. The light of the world is not America… it is Christ. 
 Shane Claiborne is an author and activist. His books include The Irresistible Revolution, Jesus for President (with Chris Haw), and Executing Grace. He is the co-founder of Red Letter Christians. 
 Doug Pagitt is a pastor from Minneapolis and the executive Director of Vote Common Good and Greater Things. Doug works to make the good more common. 
 Lisa Sharon Harper is co-author of Forgive Us: Confessions of a Compromised Faith (Zondervan, 2014) and author of the critically acclaimed The Very Good Gospel: How Everything Wrong Can Be Made Right (Waterbrook Multnomah, 2016). Harper is also president and founder of FreedomRoad.us and host of the Freedom Road Podcast. You can follow her on IG and Twitter @LisaSHarper. 
 Jemar Tisby is the New York Times bestselling author of The Color of Compromise and How to Fight Racism. He is the founder of The Witness, Inc. and co-host of the Pass The Mic podcast. 
 Soong-Chan Rah is the coauthor of Forgive Us: Confessions of a Compromised Faith (Zondervan, 2014). 

 id="file23242577" filename="with-or-without-an-external-change-christian-denomination-commends-trial-liturgy-that-blesses-gender-transitions-prays-over-surgery-and-hormonal-treatment" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.dailywire.com/news/with-or-without-an-external-change-christian-denomination-commends-trial-liturgy-that-blesses-gender-transitions-prays-over-surgery-and-hormonal-treatment">
 Menu 
 — News and Commentary — 
 ‘With Or Without An External Change’: Christian Denomination Commends Trial Liturgy That Blesses Gender Transitions, Prays Over Surgery and Hormonal Treatment 
 The Anglican Church in Canada has commended a new liturgy seeped in transgender ideology for examination, trial use, and comment, which outlines the blessing and affirmation of gender transitions. 
 The liturgy, entitled, “Pastoral Liturgies for Journeys of Gender Transition and Affirmation  was commended by the council at the Anglican Church in Canada’s synod in early November. 
 The commendation means that the liturgy will be made available for trial use in churches, study, and feedback over the next year as it is rolled out in churches. 
 A spokesman from the Anglican Church in Canada, which has about 359,000 members, told The Daily Wire that the purpose of the trial, study, and use period for the liturgy was “discipleship.  
 The liturgy adopts radical gender ideology throughout and openly celebrates gender transitions. 
 “The rites and prayers in this collection may be used in contexts where a member of the Christian family wants to have their gender identity affirmed within a supportive community,  the liturgy states, “This can be due to a gender transition process begun, in process, or completed, or due to a newfound awareness of a particular identity location on the gender spectrum.  
 It adds, “The use of these rites here presumes, rather, the active presence of a baptised Christian person within the congregation who is in some place on a journey of gender consciousness that comes with or without an external change.  
 Then noting that the change should be “welcomed  and “celebrated,  the liturgy claims, “There is a growing community of gender non-binary and transgender theologian  who the church “can learn  from. 
 The liturgy is supposed to be used by transgender and non-binary parishioners in a pastoral or community worship setting. The rites are contingent upon the local Diocesan Bishop’s allowance. 
 The liturgy also uses “they/them/theirs  pronouns, which allow for the preferred pronouns of the congregant to be used in the prayer or ceremony. 
 The rites included are pastoral prayers “blessing  the gender transition in either public worship or a smaller setting while the “Affirmation of Gender Identity  designed for public worship. The liturgy recommends placing the rites “within a eucharistic celebration  to ground them in the “salvation story.  
 In the rite “A Blessing over the Process of Gender Transition  the text the presider is supposed to read that what scripture says about the “first human’s gender  is more “poetic  rather than “clear cut.  It also says that “more than  maleness and femaleness were “affirmed as very good.  
 The text also endorses people physically changing their genders and even says it honors God. 
 “Taking steps physically or spiritually to manifest our gender identity more fully is to participate in God’s commandment to tend and love all that God has made,  a deacon is supposed to say. 
 The presider also asks for God’s blessing for “the gender transition process.  
 The text recommends that the rite “Affirmation of Gender Identity  rite take placed during a special day on the church calendar like Advent 3 or Transfiguration Sunday. 
 “We gather to acknowledge a new way in which N [the person with new gender identity] is seeking to be known and [and their new name], signifying all that N has always been, is now, and is still becoming,  the leader is supposed to say in one iteration of the ceremony. 
 In another version, the leader makes reference to the name changing of several biblical figures including Abram, Jacob, and Saul. While these figures all did have their names change, they did not change genders. 
 The presider says that the person having their gender affirmed is becoming part of this “honoured and holy tradition.  
 The resource includes additional prayers and blessings including a blessing over “treatment  which asks God to “make use of  a number of different hormones including estrogen and other “medications  There is also a prayer for surgery. 
 At the end, a number of Bible passages, hymns, and a number of resources listed that were used to create the liturgy. One of the resources used was an article from the organization TransTorah. Another was the book “Transfaith  by Chris Dowd and Christina Beardsley. 
 According to Miles Smith, a professor of history at Hillsdale College, the move to bless gender transitions is not in line with historic Anglican theology. 
 “Endorsing gender transitioning is inconsistent with Anglicanism because the historic Church of England and its successor churches–what we call Anglicanism–upheld the traditional biblical teachings on the created order, and affirmed that God created humans ‘male and female,’ he told The Daily Wire. 
 He added that the move was out of line with many Anglicans throughout the globe. 
 “This move is consistent with liberal Western Anglicans’ departures from the Communion’s historic teachings which are affirmed by the majority of Anglicans around the world, particularly those in Africa and South Asia,  Smith noted. 
 Issues of gender were not the only ones which the Anglican Church of Canada is going woke. 
 The synod discussed adopting a number of other woke policies, including the discussion of a potential “aspiration  of the denomination to be a church that “Is intentionally dismantling colonialism and passionately inclusive.  
 A spokesman for the Anglican Network in Canada, a reportedly more conservative group of Canadian Anglicans, declined to comment on the liturgy. 
 The Daily Wire is one of America’s fastest-growing conservative media companies and counter-cultural outlets for news, opinion, and entertainment. Get inside access to The Daily Wire by becoming a member. 

 id="file23242526" filename="www.jlblessings.org" parent_folder="corpus" url="https://www.jlblessings.org/">
 Hope. Change. Life. 
 Join us and help give Hope, Change, & Life to those in need. “Just Love  is our motto, as our mission is to share love with the less fortunate. We provide homeless men, women, & children in NYC & NJ with backpacks filled with the bare essentials: Snacks, Bottled Water, Sanitary/Hygiene Products, Non-perishable Foods, Clothes, Blankets, & much more. 
 Our Impact 
 To date, we have given 3,474 backpacks to the homeless communities in New York City, NY State and New Jersey. Learn how you can join the JL movement to give a blessing of your own today! 
 123+ 
 Backpacks 
 Year one - The vision (2017) 
 Our founder, Tony Osso, purchased 25 backpacks and asked his local community to help fill them with the bare essentials. 
 Year one - The Response (2017) 
 The local communities of New York & New Jersey responded with 123 filled backpacks. 
 453+ 
 Backpacks 
 Year Two - The Movement (2018) 
 A wide spread of communities, as far as California, responded with lots of love! 
 1,140+ 
 Backpacks 
 Year Three - The Collaboration (2019) 
 A tremendous amount of Love shared from many communities. Collaborating with Schools, Children and organization who want to make a difference. The personalized notes that the children wrote were priceless! 
 1,758+ 
 Backpacks 
 YEar FOUR - The ABUNDANCE (2020) 
 An abundant effort from many participants from many communities joining together, despite pandemic restrictions. Finding a way to help the many in need. An outstanding display of resolve. 

